Alcohol Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
 inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment)
 that developed during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion.
 C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly
 after, alcohol use:
 1. Slurred speech.
 2. Incoordination.
 3. Unsteady gait.
 4. Nystagmus.
 5. Impairment in attention or memory.
 6. Stupor or coma.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid alcohol
 use disorder. If a mild alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
 F10.120, and if a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10
CM code is F10.220. If there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the ICD-10
CM code is F10.920.
 562
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of alcohol intoxication is the presence of clinically significant and
 sometimes life-threatening problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate
 sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment and decision-making,
 difficulties with complex tasks such as driving, and impaired social or occupational functioning)
 that develop during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion (Criterion B). These changes are
accompanied by evidence of impaired functioning and judgment and, if intoxication is intense,
 can result in a life-threatening coma. The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical
 condition (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis), are not a reflection of conditions such as delirium, and are
 not related to intoxication with other depressant drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines) (Criterion D). The
 levels of incoordination can interfere with driving abilities and performance of usual activities to
 the point of causing vehicle crashes or other events resulting in injury. Evidence of alcohol use
 can be obtained by smelling alcohol on the individual’s breath, eliciting a history from the
 individual or another observer, and, when needed, having the individual provide breath, blood, or
 urine samples for toxicology analyses.
 Associated Features
 Signs and symptoms of intoxication are likely to be more intense when the blood alcohol level is
 rising than when it is falling. The duration of intoxication depends on how much alcohol was
 consumed over what period of time. In general, the body is able to metabolize approximately one
 drink per hour, so that the blood alcohol level generally decreases at a rate of 15–20 mg/dL per
 hour.
 During even mild alcohol intoxication, different symptoms are likely to be observed at
 different time points. Evidence of mild intoxication with alcohol can be seen in most individuals
 after approximately two drinks (each standard drink is approximately 10–12 grams of ethanol
 and raises the blood alcohol concentration approximately 20 mg/dL). Early in the drinking
 period, when blood alcohol levels are rising, symptoms often reflect stimulation (e.g.,
 talkativeness, a sensation of well-being, a bright, expansive mood). Later, especially when blood
 alcohol levels are falling, the individual is likely to become progressively more depressed,
 withdrawn, and cognitively impaired.
 Alcohol intoxication is sometimes associated with amnesia for the events that occurred
 during the course of the intoxication (“blackouts”). This phenomenon is related to a relatively
 high blood alcohol level and, perhaps, to the rapidity with which this level is reached. Acute
 alcohol intoxication may cause metabolic alterations (e.g., hypoglycemia, electrolyte
 disturbances) and may have severe cardiovascular, respiratory, and/or gastrointestinal effects. At
 very high blood alcohol levels (e.g., 200–300 mg/dL), an individual who has not developed
 tolerance for alcohol is likely to fall asleep and enter a first stage of anesthesia. Higher blood
 alcohol levels (e.g., in excess of 300–400 mg/dL) can cause inhibition of respiration and pulse
 and even death in nontolerant individuals.
 Alcohol intoxication is an important contributor to interpersonal violence and suicidal
 behavior. Among individuals intoxicated by alcohol, there appears to be an increased rate of
 accidental injury (including death due to behaviors associated with altered judgment, self-harm,
 and violence), suicidal behavior, and suicide.
 Prevalence
 The large majority of alcohol consumers are likely to have been intoxicated to some degree at
 some point in their lives. For example, in 2018, 43% of 12th-grade students in the United States
 reported having “been drunk” at least once in their lifetime, and 17.5% of them reported that they
 had gotten drunk at least once in the prior 30 days. Using a definition of intoxication of four or
 more standard drinks on any day for women and five or more
563
 standard drinks on any day for men, the 12-month prevalence of high-risk drinking in U.S. adults
 is 17.4% for Native Americans, 15.1% for African Americans, 13.5% for Latinx, 12.3% for non
Latinx Whites, and 7.2% for Asians and Pacific Islanders.
 Development and Course
 Intoxication usually occurs as an episode developing over minutes to hours and typically lasting
 several hours. In the United States, the average age at first intoxication is approximately 15
 years, with the highest prevalence at approximately 18–25 years. Frequency and intensity usually
 decrease with further advancing age. The earlier the onset of regular intoxication, the greater the
 likelihood the individual will go on to develop alcohol use disorder.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with personality characteristics of sensation seeking
 and impulsivity.
 Environmental.
 Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with having heavy-drinking peers, holding beliefs that
 heavy drinking is an important component of having fun, and using alcohol to cope with stress.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The major issues parallel the cultural differences regarding the use of alcohol overall. For
 example, some college fraternities and sororities encourage alcohol intoxication. This condition
 is also frequent on certain dates of cultural significance (e.g., New Year’s Eve) and, for some
 subgroups, during specific events (e.g., wakes following funerals). Other subgroups encourage
 drinking at religious celebrations (e.g., Jewish and Catholic holidays), while still others strongly
 discourage all drinking or intoxication (e.g., some religious groups, such as Mormons,
 fundamentalist Christians, and Muslims).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Historically, in many Western societies, acceptance of drinking and drunkenness is more
 tolerated for men, but such gender differences may be much less prominent in recent years,
 especially during adolescence and young adulthood. In general, women are less tolerant of the
 same amount of alcohol than men.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Intoxication is usually established by observing an individual’s behavior and smelling alcohol on
 the breath. The degree of intoxication increases with an individual’s blood or breath alcohol level
 and with the ingestion of other substances, especially those with sedating effects.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 A collaborative, international study in emergency departments in 17 countries found that acute
 alcohol use, independent of chronic use, increases the risk of suicide attempt, with each drink
 raising the risk by 30%. For more information, see “Association With Suicidal Thoughts or
 Behavior” in the Alcohol Use Disorder section.
 Functional Consequences of Alcohol Intoxication
 Alcohol intoxication contributed to the more than 95,000 deaths and 2.8 million years of
 potential life lost each year in the United States from 2011 through 2015, shortening the
 564
 lives of those who died by an average of 30 years. In addition, intoxication with this drug
 contributes to huge costs associated with drunk driving and lost time from school or work, as
 well as interpersonal arguments and physical fights.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 Several medical (e.g., diabetic acidosis) and neurological conditions
 Alcohol-induced mental disorders.
 (e.g., cerebellar ataxia, multiple sclerosis) can temporarily resemble alcohol intoxication.
 Alcohol intoxication is distinguished from alcohol-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication)
 because the symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in these latter disorders are in excess of those
 usually associated with alcohol intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are
 severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication.
 Intoxication with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 drugs or with other sedating substances (e.g., antihistamines, anticholinergic drugs) can be
 mistaken for alcohol intoxication. The differential requires observing alcohol on the breath,
 measuring blood or breath alcohol levels, ordering a medical workup, and gathering a good
 history. The signs and symptoms of sedative-hypnotic intoxication are very similar to those
 observed with alcohol and include similar problematic behavioral or psychological changes.
 These changes are accompanied by evidence of impaired functioning and judgment—which, if
 intense, can result in a life-threatening coma—and levels of incoordination that can interfere with
 driving abilities and with performing usual activities. However, there is no smell as there is with
 alcohol, but there is likely to be evidence of misuse of the depressant drug in the blood or urine
 toxicology analyses.
 Comorbidity
 Alcohol intoxication may occur comorbidly with other substance intoxication, especially in
 individuals with conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder. Given the typical overlap of
 alcohol intoxication with alcohol use disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Alcohol Use Disorder
 for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.
