Alcohol Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or
distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12
month period:
 1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
 intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 alcohol use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use
 alcohol, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
 5. Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
 work, school, or home.
 6. Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of alcohol use.
 8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
 554
 9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by alcohol.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication
 or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 alcohol.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (refer to Criteria A and
 B of the criteria set for alcohol withdrawal).
 b. Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a benzodiazepine) is
 taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for alcohol use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met for at least 3
 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
 “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for alcohol use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met at
 any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
 A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to alcohol is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If an alcohol intoxication, alcohol
 withdrawal, or another alcohol-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use
 the codes below for alcohol use disorder. Instead, the comorbid alcohol use disorder
 is indicated in the 4th character of the alcohol-induced disorder code (see the coding
 note for alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or a specific alcohol-induced mental
 disorder). For example, if there is comorbid alcohol intoxication and alcohol use
 disorder, only the alcohol intoxication code is given, with the 4th character indicating
 whether the comorbid alcohol use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F10.129 for
 mild alcohol use disorder with alcohol intoxication or F10.229 for a moderate or
 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol intoxication.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 F10.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F10.11 Mild, In early remission
 F10.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F10.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F10.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F10.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F10.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F10.21 Severe, In early remission
 F10.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 555
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Severity of the disorder is based on the number of diagnostic criteria endorsed. For a given
 individual, changes in severity of alcohol use disorder across time are also reflected by
 reductions in the frequency (e.g., days of use per month) or dose (e.g., number of standard drinks
 consumed per day) of alcohol used, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of
 knowledgeable others, clinician observations, and, when practical, biological testing (e.g.,
 elevations in blood tests as described in the section “Diagnostic Markers” for this disorder).
 Diagnostic Features
 Alcohol use disorder is defined by a cluster of behavioral and physical symptoms, such as
 withdrawal, tolerance, and craving. Alcohol withdrawal is characterized by withdrawal
symptoms that develop approximately 4–12 hours after the reduction of intake following
 prolonged, heavy alcohol ingestion. Because withdrawal from alcohol can be unpleasant and
 intense, individuals may continue to consume alcohol despite adverse consequences, often to
 avoid or to relieve withdrawal symptoms. Some withdrawal symptoms (e.g., sleep problems) can
 persist at lower intensities for months and can contribute to relapse. Once a pattern of repetitive
 and intense use develops, individuals with alcohol use disorder may devote substantial periods of
 their time to obtaining and consuming alcoholic beverages.
 Craving for alcohol is indicated by a strong desire to drink that makes it difficult to think of
 anything else and that often results in the onset of drinking. School and job performance may
 also suffer either from the aftereffects of drinking or from actual intoxication at school or on the
 job; child care or household responsibilities may be neglected; and alcohol-related absences may
 occur from school or work. The individual may use alcohol in physically hazardous
 circumstances (e.g., driving an automobile, swimming, operating machinery while intoxicated).
 Finally, individuals with an alcohol use disorder may continue to consume alcohol despite the
 knowledge that continued consumption poses significant physical (e.g., blackouts, liver disease),
 psychological (e.g., depression), social, or interpersonal problems (e.g., violent arguments with
 spouse while intoxicated, child abuse).
 Associated Features
 Alcohol use disorder is often associated with problems similar to those associated with other
 substances (e.g., cannabis; cocaine; heroin; amphetamines; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics).
 Alcohol may be used to alleviate the unwanted effects of these other substances or to substitute
 for them when they are not available. Symptoms of conduct problems, depression, anxiety, and
 insomnia frequently accompany heavy drinking and sometimes precede it.
 Repeated intake of high doses of alcohol can affect nearly every organ system, especially the
 gastrointestinal tract, cardiovascular system, and the central and peripheral nervous systems.
 Gastrointestinal effects include gastritis, stomach or duodenal ulcers, and, in about 15% of
 individuals who use alcohol heavily, liver cirrhosis and/or pancreatitis. There is also an increased
 rate of cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and other parts of the gastrointestinal tract. One of the
 most commonly associated conditions is low-grade hypertension. Cardiomyopathy and other
 myopathies are less common but occur at an increased rate among those who drink very heavily.
 These factors, along with marked
 556
 increases in levels of triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, contribute to an
 elevated risk of heart disease. Peripheral neuropathy may be evidenced by muscular weakness,
 paresthesias, and decreased peripheral sensation. More persistent central nervous system effects
 include cognitive deficits, such as severe memory impairment and degenerative changes in the
 cerebellum. These effects are related to the direct effects of alcohol, trauma, or vitamin
 deficiencies (particularly of the B vitamins, including thiamine). One devastating central nervous
 system effect is the relatively rare alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder, or Wernicke
Korsakoff syndrome, in which the ability to encode new memory is severely impaired. This
 condition would now be described within the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders” and would be
termed a substance/medication-induced neurocognitive disorder.
 Alcohol use disorder is an important contributor to suicide risk during severe intoxication
 and in the context of a temporary alcohol-induced depressive or bipolar disorder. There is an
 increased rate of suicidal behavior as well as of suicide among individuals with the disorder.
 Prevalence
 Alcohol use disorder is common. In the United States, lifetime prevalence rates of DSM-5
 alcohol use disorder among adults were estimated to be 29.1% overall with severity specified as
 follows: 8.6% mild, 6.6% moderate, and 13.9% severe. Among Australian adults, the estimated
 lifetime prevalence of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder was 31.0%.
 Rates of disorder vary by gender and age. In the United States, rates were greater among men
 (36.0% lifetime prevalence) than among women (22.7%). Twelve-month prevalence of DSM-IV
 alcohol use disorders in the United States was 4.6% among individuals ages 12–17 years, 16.2%
 among individuals ages 18–29 years, and 1.5% among individuals 65 years and older.
 Twelve-month prevalence of alcohol use disorders varies across U.S. ethnoracial groups as
 well. For individuals ages 12–17 years, prevalence of DSM-IV alcohol use disorders was
 greatest among Native Americans (2.8%) and non-Latinx Whites (2.2%), relative to Asian
 Americans (1.6%), individuals reporting two or more racialized backgrounds (1.6%), Hispanics
 (1.5%), and African Americans (0.8%). Among adults, data from a large U.S. population-based
 study indicated that the 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder was 14.4% in
 African Americans, 14.0% in non-Hispanic Whites, 13.6% in Hispanics, and 10.6% in Asian
 Americans and Pacific Islanders. Data from a large community-based survey of Native
 Americans from Southwestern and Northern Plains tribal nations showed that the 12-month
 prevalence of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence ranged from 4.1% to 9.8%. There is
 extensive diversity in the rates and patterns of alcohol abuse and dependence across the more
 than 570 American Indian and Alaska Native communities in the United States, as well as high
 rates of abstinence from alcohol use in some of these communities. Historical experiences of
 dispossession and subjugation and ongoing discrimination have been associated with increased
 risk of symptom onset. Given the diversity of tribal communities, prevalence estimates for
 alcohol use disorder among Native Americans should be interpreted with caution.
 Development and Course
 The first episode of alcohol intoxication is likely to occur during the mid-teens. Alcohol-related
 problems that do not meet full criteria for a use disorder or isolated problems may occur before
 age 20 years, but the age at onset of an alcohol use disorder with two or more of the criteria
 clustered together peaks in the late teens or early to mid 20s. The large majority of individuals
 who develop alcohol-related disorders do so by their late 30s. The first evidence of withdrawal is
 not likely to appear until after many other aspects of an alcohol use disorder have developed. An
 earlier onset of alcohol use disorder is observed in adolescents with preexisting conduct
 problems and those with an earlier onset of intoxication.
 557
 Alcohol use disorder has a variable course that is characterized by periods of remission and
relapse. A decision to stop drinking, often in response to a crisis, is likely to be followed by a
 period of weeks or more of abstinence, which is often followed by limited periods of controlled
 or nonproblematic drinking. However, once alcohol intake resumes, it is highly likely that
 consumption will rapidly escalate and that severe problems will once again develop.
 Alcohol use disorder is often erroneously perceived as an intractable condition, perhaps
 based on the fact that individuals who present for treatment typically have a history of many
 years of severe alcohol-related problems. However, these most severe cases represent only a
 minority of individuals with this disorder, and the typical individual with the disorder has a much
 more promising prognosis.
 Among adolescents, conduct disorder and repeated antisocial behavior often co-occur with
 alcohol- and with other substance-related disorders. While most individuals with alcohol use
 disorder develop the condition before age 40 years, perhaps 10% have later onset, as suggested
 by a prospective study in California. Age-related physical changes in older individuals result in
 increased brain susceptibility to the depressant effects of alcohol; decreased rates of liver
 metabolism of a variety of substances, including alcohol; and decreased percentages of body
 water. These changes can cause older people to develop more severe intoxication and subsequent
 problems at lower levels of consumption. Alcohol-related problems in older people are also
 especially likely to be associated with other medical complications.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Environmental risk and prognostic factors may include poverty and
 discrimination (including structural inequities such as differential incarceration rates and
 differential access to medications for addiction treatment), unemployment and low levels of
 education, cultural attitudes toward drinking and intoxication, the availability of alcohol
 (including price), acquired personal experiences with alcohol, and stress levels. Additional
 potential mediators of how alcohol problems develop in predisposed individuals include heavier
 peer substance use, exaggerated positive expectations of the effects of alcohol, and suboptimal
 ways of coping with stress.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Alcohol use disorder runs in families, with 40%–60% of the variance of
 risk explained by genetic influences. The rate of this condition is three to four times higher in
 close relatives of individuals with alcohol use disorder, with values highest for individuals with a
 greater number of affected relatives, closer genetic relationships to the affected individual, and
 higher severity of the alcohol-related problems in those relatives. A significantly higher rate of
 alcohol use disorder exists in the monozygotic twin than in the dizygotic twin of an individual
 with the condition. A three- to fourfold increase in risk has been observed in children of
 individuals with alcohol use disorder, even when these children were given up for adoption at
 birth and raised by adoptive parents who did not have the disorder.
 Advances in understanding the genes that operate through intermediate characteristics (or
 phenotypes) to affect the risk of alcohol use disorder can help to identify individuals who might
 be at particularly low or high risk for alcohol use disorder. Among the low-risk phenotypes is the
 acute alcohol-related skin flush (seen more commonly in persons of Asian descent). High
 vulnerability is associated with preexisting schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, as well as
 impulsivity (producing enhanced rates of all substance use disorders and gambling disorder), and
 a high risk specifically for alcohol use disorder is associated with a low level of response (low
sensitivity) to alcohol. A number of gene variations may account for low response to alcohol or
 modulate the dopamine reward systems; however, any single gene variant is likely to explain
 only 1%–2% of the risk for these disorders. Gene-environment interactions modulate the impact
 of genetic variations; for
 558
 example, genetic effects on alcohol use are more pronounced when social constraints are
 minimized (e.g., low parental monitoring) or when the environment permits easy access to
 alcohol or encourages its use (e.g., high peer deviance).
 Course modifiers.
 In general, high levels of impulsivity are associated with an earlier onset and
 more severe alcohol use disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In most cultures, alcohol is the most frequently used intoxicating substance and contributes to
 considerable morbidity and mortality. Globally, 2.8 million deaths were attributed to alcohol use,
 which corresponds to 2.2% of total age-standardized deaths among women and 6.8% among
 men. Globally, an estimated 237 million men and 46 million women have alcohol use disorder,
 with the highest prevalence being among men and women in the European Region (14.8% and
 3.5%) and the Region of the Americas (11.5% and 5.1%); in general, high-income countries have
 the highest prevalence. Greater acculturation to U.S. society among immigrants is associated
 with rising prevalence of alcohol use disorder, especially among women. Ethnic density (greater
 proportion of people from the same background) may decrease the risk of alcohol use disorder
 because of greater social support and buffering against the effects of discrimination. However,
 neighborhood segregation may increase the risk for disorders because of the association with
 other risk factors, such as higher concentration of alcohol advertising and retail outlets in low
income areas.
 Genetic polymorphisms for the alcohol-metabolizing enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase and
 aldehyde dehydrogenase may affect the response to alcohol. When consuming alcohol,
 individuals with certain polymorphisms can experience a flushed face and palpitations, reactions
 that can be so severe as to limit or preclude future alcohol consumption and diminish the risk for
 alcohol use disorder. For example, these gene variations are seen in as many as 40% of Japanese,
 Chinese, and Korean individuals and are related to lower risks for the disorder. However, this
 protective effect may be modulated by sociocultural factors, as shown by rising prevalence of
 alcohol use disorder in Japan, China, and South Korea over the last decades associated with
 increasing westernization and changing cultural attitudes about women’s drinking.
 Despite small variations regarding individual criterion items, the diagnostic criteria perform
 equally well across most race/ethnicity groups.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Men have higher rates of drinking and alcohol use disorder than women, although the gender gap
 is narrowing as women are initiating alcohol use at a younger age. Because females generally
 weigh less than males, have more fat and less water in their bodies, and metabolize less alcohol
 in their esophagus and stomach, they are likely to develop higher blood alcohol levels per drink
than males. Females who drink heavily may also be more vulnerable than males to some of the
 physical consequences associated with alcohol, including alcohol-related blackouts and liver
 disease. Additionally, while genetic-related mechanisms for alcohol risk overlap for males and
 females, the specific environmental components that add to the risk may differ across sexes,
 especially during adolescence. Drinking during pregnancy, which tends to decrease overall, may
 be a sign of an alcohol use disorder.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Individuals whose heavier drinking places them at elevated risk for alcohol use disorder can be
 identified both through standardized questionnaires and by elevations in blood test results likely
 to be seen with regular heavier drinking. These measures do not establish a diagnosis of an
 alcohol-related disorder but can be useful in highlighting individuals for
 559
 whom more information should be gathered. The most direct test available to measure alcohol
 consumption cross-sectionally is blood alcohol concentration, which can also be used to judge
 tolerance to alcohol. For example, an individual with a concentration of 150 mg of ethanol per
 deciliter (dL) of blood who does not show signs of intoxication can be presumed to have
 acquired at least some degree of tolerance to alcohol. At 200 mg/dL, most nontolerant
 individuals demonstrate severe intoxication.
 Regarding laboratory tests, one sensitive laboratory indicator of heavy drinking is a modest
 elevation or high-normal levels (>35 units) of gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT). This may be
 the only laboratory finding. At least 70% of individuals with a high GGT level are persistent
 heavy drinkers (i.e., consuming eight or more drinks daily on a regular basis). A second test with
 comparable or even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity is carbohydrate-deficient
 transferrin (CDT), with levels of 20 units or higher useful in identifying individuals who
 regularly consume eight or more drinks daily. Given that both GGT and CDT levels return
 toward normal within days to weeks of stopping drinking, both state markers may be useful in
 monitoring abstinence, especially when the clinician observes increases, rather than decreases, in
 these values over time—a finding indicating that the individual is likely to have returned to
 heavy drinking. The combination of tests for CDT and GGT may have even higher levels of
 sensitivity and specificity than either test used alone. Additional useful tests include the mean
 corpuscular volume (MCV), which may be elevated to high-normal values in individuals who
 drink heavily—a change that is due to the direct toxic effects of alcohol on erythropoiesis.
 Although the MCV can be used to help identify those who drink heavily, it is a poor method of
 monitoring abstinence because of the long half-life of red blood cells. Liver function tests (e.g.,
 alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase) can reveal liver injury that is a consequence
 of heavy drinking. Other potential markers of heavy drinking that are more nonspecific for
 alcohol but can help the clinician think of the possible effects of alcohol include elevations in
 blood levels or lipids (e.g., triglycerides and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol) and high
normal levels of uric acid.
 Additional diagnostic markers relate to signs and symptoms that reflect the consequences
 often associated with persistent heavy drinking. For example, dyspepsia, nausea, and bloating
can accompany gastritis, and hepatomegaly, esophageal varices, and hemorrhoids may reflect
 alcohol-induced changes in the liver. Other physical signs of heavy drinking include tremor,
 unsteady gait, insomnia, and erectile dysfunction. Males with chronic alcohol use disorder may
 exhibit decreased testicular size and feminizing effects associated with reduced testosterone
 levels. Repeated heavy drinking in females is associated with menstrual irregularities and, during
 pregnancy, spontaneous abortion and fetal alcohol syndrome. Individuals with preexisting
 histories of epilepsy or severe head trauma are more likely to develop alcohol-related seizures.
 Alcohol withdrawal may be associated with nausea, vomiting, gastritis, hematemesis, dry mouth,
 puffy blotchy complexion, and mild peripheral edema.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Most studies on suicidality and alcohol address alcohol consumption rather than alcohol use
 disorder. However, a psychological autopsy study in Australia found that aggression, psychiatric
 comorbidity, and recent interpersonal conflicts are suicide risk factors in individuals with alcohol
 use disorder. A review of studies from 1999 through 2014 conducted in several countries,
 including the United States, reported that both intoxication and chronic heavy alcohol use are
 associated with suicide, extensive population-level data link alcohol with suicide, and there is
 evidence suggesting that restrictive alcohol policies may help prevent suicide on a general
 population level. A meta-analysis of studies conducted in the United States and several other
 countries from 1996 through 2015 found that compared with nondrinking individuals, the acute
 use of alcohol was associated with a nearly
 560
 sevenfold increase in risk of suicide attempt. Moreover, in this meta-analysis, as well as in U.S.
based case-control crossover studies, heavier alcohol use within 24 hours was a much more
 potent risk factor for suicide attempt than lower alcohol use. In a cohort of patients in
 Mississippi, acute co-use of alcohol and sedatives had an even stronger association with suicide
 attempt compared with alcohol use alone. A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies from
 1975 through 2014 in several countries, including the United States, found that alcohol use is
 associated with possession of firearms, that alcohol drinkers are four to six times more likely to
 die by suicide with a gun than nondrinkers, and that heavy drinkers are more likely to choose
 firearms over other suicide methods compared with nondrinkers.
 Functional Consequences of Alcohol Use Disorder
 The diagnostic features of alcohol use disorder highlight major areas of life functioning likely to
 be impaired. These include driving and operating machinery, school and work, interpersonal
 relationships and communication, and health. Alcohol-related disorders contribute to
 absenteeism from work, job-related accidents, and low employee productivity. Rates are elevated
 in homeless individuals, perhaps reflecting a downward spiral in social and occupational
 functioning, although most individuals with alcohol use disorder continue to live with their
 families and function within their jobs.
 Alcohol use disorder is associated with a significant increase in the risk of accidents,
 violence, and suicide. It is estimated that one in five intensive care unit admissions in some urban
hospitals is related to alcohol and that 40% of individuals in the United States experience an
 alcohol-related adverse event at some time in their lives, with alcohol accounting for up to 55%
 of fatal driving events. Severe alcohol use disorder, especially in individuals with antisocial
 personality disorder, is associated with the commission of criminal acts, including homicide.
 Severe problematic alcohol use also contributes to disinhibition and feelings of sadness and
 irritability, which contribute to suicide attempts and suicide.
 Unanticipated alcohol withdrawal in hospitalized individuals for whom a diagnosis of
 alcohol use disorder has been overlooked can add to the risks and costs of hospitalization and to
 time spent in the hospital.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Nonpathological use of alcohol.
 The key element of alcohol use disorder is the use of heavy doses
 of alcohol with resulting repeated and significant distress or impaired functioning. While most
 drinkers sometimes consume enough alcohol to feel intoxicated, only a minority (< 20%) ever
 develop alcohol use disorder. Therefore, drinking, even daily, in low doses and occasional
 intoxication do not by themselves make this diagnosis.
 Alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol-induced mental disorders.
 Alcohol use disorder is
 differentiated from alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol induced mental
 disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced depressive disorder) in that alcohol use disorder describes a
 problematic pattern of alcohol use that involves impaired control over alcohol use, social
 impairment due to alcohol use, risky alcohol use (e.g., driving while intoxicated), and
 pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas alcohol
 intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that develop in the context of heavy use. Alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal,
 and alcohol-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with alcohol use disorder.
 In such cases, a diagnosis of alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or an alcohol-induced
 mental disorder should be given in addition to
 561
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
 a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 The signs and symptoms of alcohol use disorder are
 similar to those seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The two must be
 distinguished, however, because the course may be different, especially in relation to medical
 problems.
 Conduct disorder in childhood and antisocial personality disorder.
 Alcohol use disorder, along with
 other substance use disorders, is seen in the majority of individuals with antisocial personality
 disorder and preexisting conduct disorder. Because these diagnoses are associated with an early
 onset of alcohol use disorder as well as a worse prognosis, it is important to establish both
 conditions.
 Comorbidity
 Bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and antisocial personality disorder are associated with alcohol
use disorder, and most anxiety and depressive disorders are associated with alcohol use disorder
 as well. At least a part of the reported association between depression and moderate to severe
 alcohol use disorder may be attributable to temporary, alcohol-induced comorbid depressive
 symptoms resulting from the acute effects of intoxication or withdrawal, although this point has
 long been debated. Severe, repeated alcohol intoxication may also suppress immune mechanisms
 and predispose individuals to infections and increase the risk for cancers.