Alcohol Withdrawal
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use that has been heavy and prolonged.
 B. Two (or more) of the following, developing within several hours to a few days
 after the cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use described in Criterion A:
 1. Autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate greater than 100 bpm).
 2. Increased hand tremor.
 3. Insomnia.
 4. Nausea or vomiting.
 5. Transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions.
 6. Psychomotor agitation.
 7. Anxiety.
 8. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
 C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 565
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
 withdrawal from another substance.
 Specify if:
 With perceptual disturbances: This specifier applies in the rare instance when
 hallucinations (usually visual or tactile) occur with intact reality testing, or
 auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
 alcohol use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual disturbances.
 For alcohol withdrawal, without perceptual disturbances: If a mild alcohol
 use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F10.130, and if a moderate or
 severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F10.230. If
 there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F10.930.
 For alcohol withdrawal, with perceptual disturbances: If a mild alcohol use
 disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F10.132, and if a moderate or
 severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F10.232. If
 there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F10.932.
 Specifiers
When hallucinations occur in the absence of delirium (i.e., in a clear sensorium), a diagnosis of
 substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of alcohol withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
 syndrome that develops within several hours to a few days after the cessation of (or reduction in)
 heavy and prolonged alcohol use (Criteria A and B). The withdrawal syndrome includes two or
 more of the symptoms reflecting autonomic hyperactivity and anxiety listed in Criterion B, along
 with gastrointestinal symptoms.
 Withdrawal symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be
 attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
 (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder), including intoxication or withdrawal from another substance
 (e.g., sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) (Criterion D).
 Symptoms can be relieved by administering alcohol or benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam). The
 withdrawal symptoms typically begin when blood concentrations of alcohol decline sharply (i.e.,
 within 4–12 hours) after alcohol use has been stopped or reduced. Reflecting the relatively fast
 metabolism of alcohol, symptoms of alcohol withdrawal usually peak in intensity during the
 second day of abstinence and are likely to improve markedly by the fourth or fifth day.
 Following acute withdrawal, however, symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and autonomic
 dysfunction may persist for up to 3–6 months at lower levels of intensity.
 Fewer than 10% of individuals who develop alcohol withdrawal will ever develop dramatic
 symptoms (e.g., severe autonomic hyperactivity, tremors, alcohol withdrawal delirium). Tonic
clonic seizures occur in fewer than 3% of individuals.
 Associated Features
 Although confusion and changes in consciousness are not core criteria for alcohol withdrawal,
 alcohol withdrawal delirium (see “Delirium” in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders”) may
 occur in the context of withdrawal. As is true for any agitated, confused state, regardless of the
 cause, in addition to a disturbance of consciousness and cognition, withdrawal delirium can
 include visual, tactile, or (rarely) auditory hallucinations
 566
 (delirium tremens). When alcohol withdrawal delirium develops, it is likely that a clinically
 relevant medical condition may be present (e.g., liver failure, pneumonia, gastrointestinal
 bleeding, sequelae of head trauma, hypoglycemia, an electrolyte imbalance, postoperative
 status).
 Prevalence
 It is estimated that approximately 50% of middle-class, highly functional individuals with
 alcohol use disorder in the United States have ever experienced a full alcohol withdrawal
 syndrome. Among individuals with alcohol use disorder who are hospitalized or homeless, the
 rate of alcohol withdrawal may be greater than 80%. Less than 10% of individuals in withdrawal
ever demonstrate alcohol withdrawal delirium or withdrawal seizures. The prevalence of alcohol
 withdrawal symptoms does not seem to vary across U.S. ethnoracial groups.
 Development and Course
 Acute alcohol withdrawal occurs as an episode usually lasting 4–5 days and only after extended
 periods of heavy drinking. Withdrawal is relatively rare in individuals younger than 30 years,
 and the risk and severity increase with increasing age.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Alcohol withdrawal is more likely to occur with heavier alcohol intake, and that might be most
 often observed in individuals with conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
 Withdrawal states are also more severe in individuals who are also dependent on other
 depressant drugs (sedative-hypnotics) and individuals who have had more alcohol withdrawal
 experiences in the past. Predictors of severe alcohol withdrawal include alcohol withdrawal
 delirium, prior histories of severe withdrawal syndromes, low blood potassium levels, decreased
 platelet counts, and systolic hypertension.
 Environmental.
 The probability of developing alcohol withdrawal increases with the quantity and
 frequency of alcohol consumption. Most individuals with this condition are drinking daily,
 consuming large amounts (approximately more than eight drinks per day) for multiple days.
 However, there are large inter-individual differences, with enhanced risks for individuals with
 concurrent medical conditions, those with family histories of alcohol withdrawal (i.e., a genetic
 component), those with prior withdrawals, and individuals who consume sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic drugs.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Autonomic hyperactivity in the context of moderately high but falling blood alcohol levels and a
 history of prolonged, heavy drinking indicate a likelihood of alcohol withdrawal.
 Functional Consequences of Alcohol Withdrawal
 Symptoms of withdrawal may serve to perpetuate drinking behaviors and contribute to relapse,
 resulting in persistently impaired social and occupational functioning. Symptoms requiring
 medically supervised detoxification result in hospital utilization and loss of work productivity.
 Overall, the presence of withdrawal is associated with greater functional impairment and poor
 prognosis among individuals with alcohol use disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 The symptoms of alcohol withdrawal can also be mimicked by some
 medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis). Essential tremor,
 567
 a disorder that frequently runs in families, may erroneously suggest the tremulousness associated
 with alcohol withdrawal.
Alcohol-induced mental disorders.
 Alcohol withdrawal is distinguished from alcohol-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because
 the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated
 with alcohol withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to
 warrant clinical attention.
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal.
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal produces a
 syndrome very similar to that of alcohol withdrawal.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of alcohol withdrawal with alcohol use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
 under Alcohol Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
 encountered.