 Panic Attack Specifier
 Note: Symptoms are presented for the purpose of identifying a panic attack;
 however, panic attack is not a mental disorder and cannot be coded. Panic attacks
 can occur in the context of any anxiety disorder as well as other mental disorders
 (e.g., depressive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, substance use disorders)
 and some medical conditions (e.g., cardiac, respiratory, vestibular, gastrointestinal).
 When the presence of a panic attack is identified, it should be noted as a specifier
(e.g., “posttraumatic stress disorder with panic attacks”). For panic disorder, the
 presence of panic attack is contained within the criteria for the disorder and panic
 attack is not used as a specifier.
 An abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within
 minutes, and during which time four (or more) of the following symptoms occur:
 Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
 1. 
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
 2. Sweating.
 3. Trembling or shaking.
 4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
 5. Feelings of choking.
 6. Chest pain or discomfort.
 7. Nausea or abdominal distress.
 8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.
 9. Chills or heat sensations.
 10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
 11. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from
 oneself).
 12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
 13. Fear of dying.
 Note: Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache,
 uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen. Such symptoms should not count
 as one of the four required symptoms.
 Features
 The essential feature of a panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that
 reaches a peak within minutes and during which time 4 or more of 13 physical and cognitive
 symptoms occur. Eleven of these 13 symptoms are physical (e.g., palpitations, sweating), while 2
 are cognitive (i.e., fear of losing control or going crazy, fear of dying). “Fear of going crazy” is a
 colloquialism often used by individuals with panic attacks and is not intended as a pejorative or
 diagnostic term. The term within minutes means that the time to peak intensity is literally only a
 few minutes. A panic attack can arise from either a calm state or an
 243
 anxious state, and time to peak intensity should be assessed independently of any preceding
 anxiety. That is, the start of the panic attack is the point at which there is an abrupt increase in
 discomfort rather than the point at which anxiety first developed. Likewise, a panic attack can
 return to either an anxious state or a calm state and possibly peak again. A panic attack is
 distinguished from ongoing anxiety by its time to peak intensity, which occurs within minutes;
 its discrete nature; and its typically greater severity. Attacks that meet all other criteria but have
 fewer than four physical and/or cognitive symptoms are referred to as limited-symptom attacks.
There are two characteristic types of panic attacks: expected and unexpected. Expected panic
 attacks are attacks for which there is an obvious cue or trigger, such as situations in which panic
 attacks have typically occurred. Unexpected panic attacks are those for which there is no obvious
 cue or trigger at the time of occurrence (e.g., when relaxing or out of sleep [nocturnal panic
 attack]). The determination of whether panic attacks are expected or unexpected is made by the
 clinician, who makes this judgment based on a combination of careful questioning as to the
 sequence of events preceding or leading up to the attack and the individual’s own judgment of
 whether the attack seemed to occur for no apparent reason. Panic attacks can occur in the context
 of any mental disorder (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, eating
 disorders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, personality disorders, psychotic disorders,
 substance use disorders) and some medical conditions (e.g., cardiac, respiratory, vestibular,
 gastrointestinal), with the majority of presentations never meeting criteria for panic disorder.
 Recurrent unexpected panic attacks are required for a diagnosis of panic disorder.
 Associated Features
 One type of unexpected panic attack is a nocturnal panic attack (i.e., waking from sleep in a
 state of panic), which differs from panicking after fully waking from sleep.
 Prevalence
 In the general population, 12-month prevalence estimates for panic attacks in Spain and in the
 United States range from 9.5% to 11.2% in adults. Twelve-month prevalence estimates do not
 appear to differ significantly among African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latinx.
 Approximately 8.5% of American Indians report a lifetime history of panic attacks. Lifetime
 prevalence rates of panic attacks cross-nationally are 13.2%. Women are more frequently
 affected than men, although this gender difference is more pronounced for panic disorder. Panic
 attacks can occur in children but are relatively rare until the age of puberty, when the prevalence
 rates increase. The prevalence declines in older individuals, possibly reflecting diminishing
 severity to subclinical levels.
 Development and Course
 The mean age at onset for panic attacks in the United States is approximately 22–23 years among
 adults. However, the course of panic attacks is likely influenced by the course of any co
occurring mental disorder(s) and stressful life events. Panic attacks are uncommon, and
 unexpected panic attacks are rare, in preadolescent children. Adolescents might be less willing
 than adults to openly discuss panic attacks, even though they present with episodes of intense
 fear or discomfort. Lower prevalence of panic attacks in older individuals may be related to a
 weaker autonomic response to emotional states relative to younger individuals. Older individuals
 may be less inclined to use the word “fear” and more inclined to use the word “discomfort” to
 describe panic attacks. Older individuals with “panicky feelings” may have a hybrid of limited
symptom attacks and generalized anxiety. In addition, older individuals tend to attribute panic
 attacks to certain situations that are stressful (e.g., medical procedures, social settings) and may
 retrospectively endorse explanations for the panic attack even if it was unexpected in the
 moment. This may result in under-endorsement of unexpected panic attacks in older individuals.
244
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Negative affectivity (neuroticism) (i.e., proneness to experiencing negative
 emotions), anxiety sensitivity (i.e., the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are
 harmful), behavioral inhibition, and harm avoidance are risk factors for the onset of panic
 attacks. History of “fearful spells” (i.e., limited-symptom attacks that do not meet full criteria for
 a panic attack) may be a risk factor for later panic attacks.
 Environmental.
 Smoking is a risk factor for panic attacks. Most individuals report identifiable
 stressors in the months before their first panic attack (e.g., interpersonal stressors and stressors
 related to physical well-being, such as negative experiences with illicit or prescription drugs,
 disease, or death in the family). Separation from parents, overprotective parenting, and parental
 rejection are risk factors for panic attacks.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who report low
 perceptions of control over the disease and negative beliefs about the consequences of
 unpredictable breathless attacks are more likely to have panic symptoms.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Cultural interpretations may influence the determination of panic attacks as expected or
 unexpected. Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache, and
 uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen; however, such symptoms should not count as
 one of the four required symptoms. Frequency of each of the 13 symptoms varies cross
culturally (e.g., higher rates of paresthesias in African Americans, of dizziness in several Asian
 groups, and of trembling in non-Latinx Whites). Cultural concepts of distress also influence the
 cross-cultural presentation of panic attacks, resulting in different symptom profiles across
 different cultural groups. Examples include khyâl (wind) attacks, a Cambodian cultural
 syndrome involving dizziness, tinnitus, and neck soreness; and trúng gió (wind-related) attacks,
 a Vietnamese cultural syndrome associated with headaches. Cultural explanatory models can
 heighten the salience of specific panic symptoms. For example, traditional Cambodian views
 about the abnormal circulation of khyâl in the body are associated with the perceived
 dangerousness of some symptoms (e.g., neck soreness), which can trigger catastrophic
 cognitions and panic attacks. Ataque de nervios (attack of nerves) is a cultural syndrome among
 Latin Americans that may involve trembling, uncontrollable screaming or crying, aggressive or
 suicidal behavior, and depersonalization or derealization, and which may be experienced for
 longer than only a few minutes. Some clinical presentations of ataque de nervios fulfill criteria
 for conditions other than panic attack (e.g., other specified dissociative disorder). Also, cultural
 expectations may influence the classification of panic attacks as expected or unexpected, as
 cultural syndromes may create fear of certain situations, ranging from interpersonal arguments
 (associated with ataque de nervios), to types of exertion (associated with khyâl attacks), to
 atmospheric wind (associated with trúng gió attacks). Clarification of the details of cultural
 attributions may aid in distinguishing expected and unexpected panic attacks. For more
 information about cultural concepts of distress, see the “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis”
 chapter in Section III.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Panic attacks are more common in women than in men. Among those who report panic attacks,
 women are more likely to endorse symptoms of shortness of breath and nausea but less likely to
 endorse sweating than are men.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Physiological recordings of naturally occurring panic attacks in individuals with panic disorder
 indicate abrupt surges of arousal, usually of heart rate, that reach a peak within
 245
 minutes and subside within minutes, and for a proportion of these individuals the panic attack
 may be preceded by cardiorespiratory instabilities. Panic attacks are characterized by heart rate
 and tidal volume increases and a drop in pCO2.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Panic attacks are related to a higher rate of suicide attempts and suicidal thoughts even when
 comorbidity and other suicide risk factors are taken into account.
 Functional Consequences of Panic Attacks
 In the context of co-occurring mental disorders, including anxiety disorders, depressive
 disorders, bipolar disorder, substance use disorders, psychotic disorders, and personality
 disorders, panic attacks are associated with increased symptom severity, higher rates of
 comorbidity, and poorer treatment response. Recurrent panic attacks in particular are associated
 with increased odds of many mental health diagnoses. Furthermore, more severe panic attacks
 are associated with a greater likelihood of developing panic disorder and a variety of other
 mental health conditions, as well as greater persistence of mental illness and impaired
 functioning. Also, full-symptom panic attacks typically are associated with greater morbidity
 (e.g., greater health care utilization, more disability, poorer quality of life) than limited-symptom
 attacks.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other paroxysmal episodes (e.g., “anger attacks”).
 Panic attacks should not be diagnosed if the
 episodes do not involve the essential feature of an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense
 discomfort, but rather other emotional states (e.g., anger, grief).
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 misdiagnosed 
as 
panic 
attacks 
Medical conditions that can cause or be
 include 
hyperthyroidism, 
hyperparathyroidism,
 pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure disorders, and cardiopulmonary conditions
 (e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
 Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g., serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism; Holter monitor
 for arrhythmias) or physical examinations (e.g., for cardiac conditions) may be helpful in
 determining the etiological role of another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 Panic disorder.
 F40.00
 Intoxication with central nervous system stimulants
 (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine-type substances, caffeine) or cannabis and withdrawal from central
 nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can precipitate a panic attack. A detailed
 history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks prior to excessive
 substance use. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms
 during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control,
 slurred speech, or amnesia) suggest the possibility that a medical condition or a substance may
 be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Repeated unexpected panic attacks are required but are not sufficient for the
 diagnosis of panic disorder (i.e., full diagnostic criteria for panic disorder must be met).
 Comorbidity
 Panic attacks are associated with increased likelihood of various comorbid mental disorders,
 including anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, impulse-control disorders,
 and substance use disorders. Panic attacks are associated with increased likelihood of later
 developing anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, alcohol use disorder, and
 possibly other disorders.
 246