Generalized Anxiety Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more days
 than not for at least 6 months, about a number of events or activities (such as
 work or school performance).
 B. The individual finds it difficult to control the worry.
 C. The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six
 symptoms (with at least some symptoms having been present for more days
 than not for the past 6 months):
 Note: Only one item is required in children.
 1. Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge.
 2. Being easily fatigued.
 3. Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank.
 4. Irritability.
 5. Muscle tension.
 6. Sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless, unsatisfying
 sleep).
 D. The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 251
 E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
 hyperthyroidism).
 F. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., anxiety
 or worry about having panic attacks in panic disorder, negative evaluation in
 social anxiety disorder, contamination or other obsessions in obsessive
compulsive disorder, separation from attachment figures in separation anxiety
 disorder, reminders of traumatic events in posttraumatic stress disorder, gaining
 weight in anorexia nervosa, physical complaints in somatic symptom disorder,
 perceived appearance flaws in body dysmorphic disorder, having a serious
 illness in illness anxiety disorder, or the content of delusional beliefs in
 schizophrenia or delusional disorder).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of generalized anxiety disorder is excessive anxiety and worry
 (apprehensive expectation) about a number of events or activities. The intensity, duration, or
frequency of the anxiety and worry is out of proportion to the actual likelihood or impact of the
 anticipated event. The individual finds it difficult to control the worry and to keep worrisome
 thoughts from interfering with attention to tasks at hand. Adults with generalized anxiety
 disorder often worry about everyday, routine life circumstances, such as possible job
 responsibilities, health and finances, the health of family members, misfortune to their children,
 or minor matters (e.g., doing household chores or being late for appointments). Children with
 generalized anxiety disorder tend to worry excessively about their competence or the quality of
 their performance. During the course of the disorder, the focus of worry may shift from one
 concern to another.
 Several features distinguish generalized anxiety disorder from nonpathological anxiety. First,
 the worries associated with generalized anxiety disorder are excessive and typically interfere
 significantly with psychosocial functioning, whereas the worries of everyday life are not
 excessive and are perceived as more manageable and may be put off when more pressing matters
 arise. Second, the worries associated with generalized anxiety disorder are more pervasive,
 pronounced, and distressing; have longer duration; and frequently occur without precipitants.
 The greater the range of life circumstances about which a person worries (e.g., finances,
 children’s safety, job performance), the more likely his or her symptoms are to meet criteria for
 generalized anxiety disorder. Third, everyday worries are much less likely to be accompanied by
 physical symptoms (e.g., restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge). Individuals with
 generalized anxiety disorder report subjective distress as a result of constant worry and related
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 The anxiety and worry are accompanied by at least three of the following additional
 symptoms: restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, being easily fatigued, difficulty
 concentrating or mind going blank, irritability, muscle tension, and disturbed sleep, although
 only one additional symptom is required in children.
 Associated Features
 Associated with muscle tension, there may be trembling, twitching, feeling shaky, and muscle
 aches or soreness. Many individuals with generalized anxiety disorder also experience somatic
 symptoms (e.g., sweating, nausea, diarrhea) and an exaggerated startle response. Symptoms of
 autonomic hyperarousal (e.g., accelerated heart rate, shortness of breath, dizziness) are less
 prominent in generalized anxiety disorder than in other anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder.
 Other conditions that may be associated with stress (e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, headaches)
 frequently accompany generalized anxiety disorder.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder is 0.9% among adolescents and 2.9%
 among adults in the general community of the United States. The mean 12-month
 252
 prevalence for the disorder around the world is 1.3%, with a range of 0.2% to 4.3%. The lifetime
 morbid risk in the United States is 9.0%. Women and adolescent girls are at least twice as likely
 as men and adolescent boys to experience generalized anxiety disorder. The 12-month
prevalence in older adults including individuals age 75 years and older ranges from 2.8% to
 3.1% in the United States, Israel, and European countries.
 Individuals of European descent tend to have symptoms that meet criteria for generalized
 anxiety disorder more frequently than do individuals of Asian and African descent. Furthermore,
 individuals from high-income countries are more likely than individuals from low- and middle
income countries to report that they have experienced symptoms that meet criteria for
 generalized anxiety disorder in their lifetime.
 Development and Course
 Many individuals with generalized anxiety disorder report that they have felt anxious and
 nervous all their lives. The mean age at onset for generalized anxiety disorder in North America
 is 35 years, later than that for the other anxiety disorders; the disorder rarely occurs prior to
 adolescence. However, age at onset is spread over a very broad range and tends to be older in
 lower-income countries worldwide. The symptoms of excessive worry and anxiety may occur
 early in life but are then manifested as an anxious temperament. Generalized anxiety disorder
 symptoms tend to be chronic and wax and wane across the life span, fluctuating between
 syndromal and subsyndromal forms of the disorder. Course is more persistent in lower-income
 countries, but impairment tends to be higher in high-income countries. Rates of full remission are
 very low.
 The earlier in life individuals have symptoms that meet criteria for generalized anxiety
 disorder, the more comorbidity and impairment they tend to have. Younger adults experience
 greater severity of symptoms than do older adults.
 The clinical expression of generalized anxiety disorder is relatively consistent across the life
 span. The primary difference across age groups is in the content of the individual’s worry; thus,
 the content of an individual’s worry tends to be age appropriate.
 In children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder, the anxieties and worries often
 concern the quality of their performance or competence at school or in sporting events, even
 when their performance is not being evaluated by others. There may be excessive concerns about
 punctuality. They may also worry about catastrophic events, such as earthquakes or nuclear war.
 Children with the disorder may be overly conforming, perfectionistic, and unsure of themselves
 and may tend to redo tasks because of excessive dissatisfaction with less-than-perfect
 performance. They may be overzealous in seeking reassurance and approval and require
 excessive reassurance about their performance and other things they are worried about.
 In the elderly, the advent of chronic physical disease can be a potent issue for excessive
 worry. In the frail elderly, worries about safety—and especially about falling—may limit
 activities.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity (neuroticism), harm avoidance,
 reward dependence, and attentional bias to threat have been associated with generalized anxiety
 disorder.
 Environmental.
 Childhood adversities and parenting practices (e.g., overprotection, overcontrol,
 reinforcement of avoidance) have been associated with generalized anxiety disorder.
Genetic and physiological. One-third of the risk of experiencing generalized anxiety disorder is
 genetic, and these genetic factors overlap with the risk of negative affectivity (neuroticism) and
 are shared with other anxiety and mood disorders, particularly major depressive disorder.
 253
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There is considerable cultural variation in the expression of generalized anxiety disorder. For
 example, in some cultural contexts, somatic symptoms predominate in the expression of the
 disorder, whereas in other cultural contexts cognitive symptoms tend to predominate. This
 difference may be more evident on initial presentation than subsequently, as more symptoms are
 reported over time. There is no information as to whether the propensity for excessive worrying
 is related to cultural background, although the topic being worried about can be culturally
 specific. It is important to consider the social and cultural context when evaluating whether
 worries about certain situations are excessive. In the United States, higher prevalence is
 associated with exposure to racism and ethnic discrimination and, for some ethnoracial groups,
 with being born in the United States.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In clinical settings, generalized anxiety disorder is diagnosed somewhat more frequently in
 women than in men (about 55%–60% of those presenting with the disorder are women). In
 epidemiological studies, approximately two-thirds are women. Women and men who experience
 generalized anxiety disorder appear to have similar symptoms but demonstrate different patterns
 of comorbidity consistent with gender differences in the prevalence of disorders. In women,
 comorbidity is largely confined to the anxiety disorders and unipolar depression, whereas in
 men, comorbidity is more likely to extend to the substance use disorders as well.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with increased suicidal thoughts and behavior, even
 after adjustment for comorbid disorders and stressful life events. Psychological autopsy studies
 show that generalized anxiety disorder is the most frequent anxiety disorder diagnosed in
 suicides. Both subthreshold and threshold generalized anxiety disorder occurring in the past year
 may be associated with suicidal thoughts.
 Functional Consequences of Generalized Anxiety Disorder
 Excessive worrying impairs the individual’s capacity to do things quickly and efficiently,
 whether at home or at work. The worrying takes time and energy; the associated symptoms of
 muscle tension and feeling keyed up or on edge, tiredness, difficulty concentrating, and disturbed
 sleep contribute to the impairment. Importantly the excessive worrying may impair the ability of
 individuals with generalized anxiety disorder to encourage confidence in their children.
 Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with significant disability and distress that is
 independent of comorbid disorders, and most non-institutionalized adults with the disorder are
 moderately to seriously disabled. Generalized anxiety disorder accounts for 110 million
disability days per annum in the U.S. population. Generalized anxiety disorder is also linked to
 decreased work performance, increased medical resource use, and increased risk for coronary
 morbidity.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another
 medical condition should be assigned if the individual’s anxiety and worry are judged, based on
 history, laboratory findings, or physical examination, to be a physiological effect of another
 specific medical condition (e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism).
 254
 Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is
 distinguished from generalized anxiety disorder by the fact that a substance or medication (e.g., a
 drug of abuse, exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the anxiety. For
 example, severe anxiety that occurs only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be
 diagnosed as caffeine-induced anxiety disorder.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with social anxiety disorder often have anticipatory anxiety
 that is focused on upcoming social situations in which they must perform or be evaluated by
 others, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry, whether or not they are
 being evaluated.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder worry excessively only
 about separation from attachment figures, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder
 may worry about separation but present other excessive worry concerns as well.
 Panic disorder.
 Panic attacks that are triggered by worry in generalized anxiety disorder would
 not qualify for panic disorder. However, if the individual experiences unexpected panic attacks
 as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of the attacks, then
 an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.
 Illness anxiety disorder and somatic symptom disorder.
 Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder
 worry about multiple events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health.
 If the individual’s only fear is his or her own illness, then illness anxiety disorder should be
 diagnosed. Worry focusing on somatic symptoms is characteristic for somatic symptom disorder.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Several features distinguish the excessive worry of generalized
 anxiety disorder from the obsessional thoughts of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In generalized
 anxiety disorder the focus of the worry is about forthcoming problems, and it is the
 excessiveness of the worry about future events that is abnormal. In obsessive-compulsive
 disorder, the obsessions are inappropriate ideas that take the form of intrusive and unwanted
 thoughts, urges, or images.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder and adjustment disorders.
 Anxiety 
is 
invariably 
present 
in
 posttraumatic stress disorder. Generalized anxiety disorder is not diagnosed if the anxiety and
 worry are better explained by symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder. Although anxiety may
 manifest in adjustment disorder, this residual category should be used only when the criteria are
 not met for any other mental disorder (including generalized anxiety disorder). Moreover, in
Depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders.
 adjustment disorders, the anxiety occurs in response to an identifiable stressor within 3 months
 of the onset of the stressor and does not persist for more than 6 months after the termination of
 the stressor or its consequences.
 Although generalized anxiety/worry is a common
 associated feature of depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders, generalized anxiety disorder
 may be diagnosed comorbidly if the anxiety/worry is sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
 attention.
 Comorbidity
 Individuals whose presentation meets criteria for generalized anxiety disorder are likely to have
 met, or currently meet, criteria for other anxiety and unipolar depressive disorders. The negative
 affectivity (neuroticism) or emotional liability that underpins this pattern of comorbidity is
 associated with temperamental antecedents and genetic and environmental risk factors shared
 between these disorders, although independent pathways are also possible. Comorbidity with
 substance use, conduct, psychotic, neurodevelopmental, and neurocognitive disorders is less
 common.