Separation Anxiety Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Developmentally inappropriate and excessive fear or anxiety concerning
 separation from those to whom the individual is attached, as evidenced by at
 least three of the following:
 1. Recurrent excessive distress when anticipating or experiencing separation
 from home or from major attachment figures.
 2. Persistent and excessive worry about losing major attachment figures or
 about possible harm to them, such as illness, injury, disasters, or death.
 3. Persistent and excessive worry about experiencing an untoward event (e.g.,
 getting lost, being kidnapped, having an accident, becoming ill) that causes
 separation from a major attachment figure.
 4. Persistent reluctance or refusal to go out, away from home, to school, to
 work, or elsewhere because of fear of separation.
 5. Persistent and excessive fear of or reluctance about being alone or without
 major attachment figures at home or in other settings.
 6. Persistent reluctance or refusal to sleep away from home or to go to sleep
 without being near a major attachment figure.
 7. Repeated nightmares involving the theme of separation.
 8. Repeated complaints of physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, stomachaches,
 nausea, vomiting) when separation from major attachment figures occurs or
 is anticipated.
 B. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, lasting at least 4 weeks in children
 and adolescents and typically 6 months or more in adults.
 C. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
 refusing to leave home because of excessive resistance to change in autism
 spectrum disorder; delusions or hallucinations concerning separation in
 psychotic disorders; refusal to go outside without a trusted companion in
 agoraphobia; worries about ill health or other harm befalling significant others in
 generalized anxiety disorder; or concerns about having an illness in illness
 anxiety disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of separation anxiety disorder is excessive fear or anxiety concerning
 separation from home or attachment figures. The anxiety exceeds what may be expected given
 the individual’s developmental level (Criterion A). Individuals with separation anxiety disorder
 have symptoms that meet at least three of the following criteria: They experience recurrent
 excessive distress when separation from home or major attachment figures is anticipated or
 occurs (Criterion A1). They worry about the well-being or death of attachment figures,
 particularly when separated from them, and they need to know the whereabouts of their
 attachment figures and want to stay in touch with them (Criterion A2). They also worry about
 untoward events to themselves, such as getting lost, being kidnapped, or having an accident, that
 would keep them from ever being reunited with their major attachment figure (Criterion A3).
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder are reluctant or refuse to go out by themselves
 because of separation fears (Criterion A4). They have
 218
 persistent and excessive fear or reluctance about being alone or without major attachment figures
 at home or in other settings. Children with separation anxiety disorder may be unable to stay or
 go in a room by themselves and may display “clinging” behavior, staying close to or
 “shadowing” the parent around the house, or requiring someone to be with them when going to
 another room in the house (Criterion A5). They have persistent reluctance or refusal to go to
 sleep without being near a major attachment figure or to sleep away from home (Criterion A6).
 Children with this disorder often have difficulty at bedtime and may insist that someone stay
 with them until they fall asleep. During the night, they may make their way to their parents’ bed
 (or that of a significant other, such as a sibling). Children may be reluctant or refuse to attend
 camp, to sleep at friends’ homes, or to go on errands. Adults may be uncomfortable when
 traveling independently (e.g., sleeping in a hotel room away from home or attachment figures).
 There may be repeated nightmares in which the content expresses the individual’s separation
 anxiety (e.g., destruction of the family through fire, murder, or other catastrophe) (Criterion A7).
 Physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, abdominal complaints, nausea, vomiting) are common in
 children when separation from major attachment figures occurs or is anticipated (Criterion A8).
 Cardiovascular symptoms such as palpitations, dizziness, and feeling faint are rare in younger
 children but may occur in adolescents and adults.
 The disturbance must last for a period of at least 4 weeks in children and adolescents younger
 than 18 years and is typically 6 months or longer in adults (Criterion B). However, the duration
 criterion for adults should be used as a general guide, with allowance for some degree of
flexibility. The disturbance must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C).
 Associated Features
 When separated from major attachment figures, children and adults with separation anxiety
 disorder may exhibit social withdrawal, apathy, sadness, or difficulty concentrating on work or
 play. Depending on their age, individuals may have fears of animals, monsters, the dark,
 muggers, burglars, kidnappers, car accidents, plane travel, and other situations that are perceived
 as presenting danger to the family or themselves. Some individuals become homesick and
 extremely uncomfortable when away from home. Separation anxiety disorder in children may
 lead to school refusal, which in turn may lead to academic difficulties and social isolation. When
 extremely upset at the prospect of separation, children may show anger or occasionally
 aggression toward someone who is forcing separation. When alone, especially in the evening or
 the dark, young children may report unusual perceptual experiences (e.g., seeing people peering
 into their room, frightening creatures reaching for them, feeling eyes staring at them). Children
 with this disorder may be described as demanding, intrusive, and in need of constant attention,
 and, as adults, may appear dependent and overprotective as parents. Adults with the disorder are
 likely to text or phone their major attachment figures throughout the day and repeatedly check on
 their whereabouts. The individual’s excessive demands often become a source of frustration for
 family members, leading to resentment and conflict within the family.
 Prevalence
 The 6- to 12-month prevalence of separation anxiety disorder in children is estimated to be
 approximately 4%. In a community sample of toddlers, separation anxiety disorder appears to be
 equally represented among girls and boys; however, school-age girls appear to have higher
 prevalence rates than school-age boys. In adolescents in the United States, the 12-month
 prevalence is 1.6%. Separation anxiety disorder decreases in prevalence from childhood through
 adolescence and adulthood. In clinical samples of children, the disorder is equally common in
 boys and girls in contrast to community samples, where the
 219
 disorder is more frequent in girls. Reports from children tend to yield higher rates of separation
 anxiety disorder than parent reports of the child’s symptoms.
 For adults, the 12-month prevalence of separation anxiety disorder in the United States
 ranges from 0.9% to 1.9%. Among adults with separation anxiety disorder, women tend to have
 higher prevalence rates of the disorder in both clinical and community studies. Across 18
 countries, the mean 12-month prevalence in adults is 1.0%, with a range of < 0.1% to 2.7% (e.g.,
 0.3% in Romania, 2.7% in Colombia). A higher prevalence was observed in women compared
 with men in this total sample (1.3% compared with 0.8%).
 Development and Course
 Periods of heightened separation anxiety from attachment figures are part of normal early
 development and may indicate the development of secure attachment relationships (e.g., around
age 1 year, when infants may experience stranger anxiety). Onset of separation anxiety disorder
 may be as early as preschool age and may occur at any time during childhood and in
 adolescence. Across 18 countries, median age at onset reported by adults (age 18 years and
 older) with the disorder is in late adolescence in high- and upper-middle-income countries and in
 the mid-20’s in low- and lower-middle-income countries. Most adults report a fluctuating course
 of the disorder over their lifetime, and they may report some symptoms in childhood.
 Typically there are periods of exacerbation and remission. In some cases, both the anxiety
 about possible separation and the avoidance of situations involving separation from the home or
 nuclear family (e.g., going away to college, moving away from attachment figures) may persist
 through adulthood. However, the majority of children with separation anxiety disorder are free of
 impairing anxiety disorders over their lifetimes.
 The manifestations of separation anxiety disorder vary with age. Younger children are more
 reluctant to go to school or may avoid school altogether. Younger children may not express
 worries or specific fears of definite threats to parents, home, or themselves, and the anxiety is
 manifested only when separation is experienced. As children age, worries emerge; these are often
 worries about specific dangers (e.g., accidents, kidnapping, mugging, death) or vague concerns
 about not being reunited with attachment figures. In adults, separation anxiety disorder may limit
 their ability to cope with changes in circumstances (e.g., moving, getting married). Adults with
 the disorder are typically overconcerned about their offspring, spouses, parents, and pets and
 experience marked discomfort when separated from them. They may also experience significant
 disruption in work or social experiences because of needing to continuously check on the
 whereabouts of a significant other.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Separation anxiety disorder often develops after life stress, especially a loss (e.g.,
 the death of a relative or pet; an illness of the individual or a relative; a change of schools;
 parental divorce; a move to a new neighborhood; immigration; a disaster that involved periods of
 separation from attachment figures). Being bullied during childhood has been shown to be a risk
 factor for the development of separation anxiety disorder. In young adults, other examples of life
 stress include leaving the parental home, entering into a romantic relationship, and becoming a
 parent. A history of parental overprotection and intrusiveness may be associated with separation
 anxiety disorder in both childhood and adulthood.
 Genetic and physiological.
 There is evidence that separation anxiety disorder may be heritable.
 Heritability was estimated at 73% in a community sample of 6-year-old twins, with higher rates
 found in girls. Children with separation anxiety disorder display particularly enhanced sensitivity
 to respiratory stimulation using CO2-enriched air. Separation anxiety disorder also appears to
 aggregate in families.
 220
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There are cultural variations in the degree to which it is considered desirable to tolerate
 separation, so that demands and opportunities for separation between parents and children are
 avoided in some cultural contexts. For example, there is wide variation across countries and
cultural contexts with respect to the age at which it is expected that offspring should leave the
 parental home. Youth vary in their self-reports of separation anxiety symptoms; for instance,
 Taiwanese youth endorse higher symptoms of separation anxiety compared with U.S. youth. It is
 important to differentiate separation anxiety disorder from the high value some cultural
 communities place on strong interdependence among family members.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Separation anxiety disorder in children and adolescents may be associated with an increased risk
 for suicide, although this association is not specific to separation anxiety disorder and is found in
 other anxiety disorders where there is significant comorbidity. A large twin study showed that
 being bullied during childhood was a risk factor for suicidal thoughts during young adulthood.
 Functional Consequences of Separation Anxiety Disorder
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder often limit independent activities away from home
 or attachment figures (e.g., in children, avoiding school, not going to camp, having difficulty
 sleeping alone; in adolescents, not going away to college; in adults, not leaving the parental
 home, not traveling long distances without their close attachments, not working outside the
 home). Symptoms in adults are often debilitating and affect multiple areas of their lives. For
 example, adults with separation anxiety disorder may deliberately reorganize their work
 schedules and other activities because of their anxieties about possible separations from close
 attachment figures; they may often express frustration with the limitations on their lives because
 of their need to maintain proximity to, or at least virtual contact with, their key attachment
 figures (e.g., by texting or phoning them repeatedly throughout the day). Separation anxiety
 disorder is associated with greater reported impairment in individuals from high- and upper
middle-income countries compared with those from low- and lower-middle-income countries.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Generalized anxiety disorder.
 Separation anxiety disorder is distinguished from generalized anxiety
 disorder in that the anxiety in separation anxiety disorder predominantly concerns real or
 imagined separation from attachment figures. Furthermore, if other worries occur, they are not
 excessive.
 Panic disorder.
 In separation anxiety disorder, threats of separation from close attachments may
 lead to extreme anxiety and panic attacks. In contrast to panic disorder, where panic attacks
 occur unexpectedly and are usually accompanied by fears of dying or going “crazy,” the panic
 attacks in separation anxiety disorder occur in anticipation of real or imagined separations from
 attachment figures or places of safety and security, or from worries that untoward events will
 befall the individual’s close attachments.
 Agoraphobia.
 Unlike individuals with agoraphobia, those with separation anxiety disorder are not
 anxious about being trapped or incapacitated in situations from which escape is perceived as
 difficult in the event of panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms. Instead, they fear
 being away from places of safety associated with their major attachment figures.
 221
Conduct disorder.
 School avoidance (truancy) is common in conduct disorder, but anxiety about
 separation is not responsible for school absences, and the child or adolescent usually stays away
 from, rather than returns to, the home.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 School refusal may be attributable to social anxiety disorder. In such
 instances, the school avoidance is due to fear of being judged negatively by others rather than
 due to worries about being separated from attachment figures.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Fear of separation from loved ones is common after a traumatic
 event such as a major disaster, particularly when periods of separation from loved ones are
 experienced during the traumatic event. In posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the central
 symptoms concern intrusions about, and avoidance of, memories associated with the traumatic
 event itself, whereas in separation anxiety disorder, the worries and avoidance concern the well
being of attachment figures and separation from them.
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Separation anxiety disorder concerns worries about the health and well
being of close attachments. In contrast, individuals with illness anxiety disorder worry about
 specific medical illnesses they themselves may have, not about them being separated from their
 close attachments.
 Prolonged grief disorder.
 Intense yearning or longing for the deceased, intense sorrow and
 emotional pain, and preoccupation with the deceased or the circumstances of the death are
 expected responses occurring in prolonged grief disorder, whereas fear of possible separation
 from key attachment figures is central in separation anxiety disorder.
 Depressive and bipolar disorders.
 These disorders may be associated with reluctance to leave
 home, but the main concern is not worry or fear of untoward events befalling attachment figures,
 but rather low motivation for engaging with the outside world. However, individuals with
 separation anxiety disorder may become depressed while being separated or in anticipation of
 separation.
 Oppositional defiant disorder.
 Children and adolescents with separation anxiety disorder may be
 oppositional in the context of being forced to separate from attachment figures. Oppositional
 defiant disorder should be considered only when there is persistent oppositional behavior
 unrelated to the anticipation or occurrence of separation from attachment figures.
 Psychotic disorders.
 Unlike the hallucinations in psychotic disorders, the unusual perceptual
 experiences that may occur in separation anxiety disorder are usually based on a misperception
 of an actual stimulus, occur only in certain situations (e.g., nighttime), and are reversed by the
 presence of an attachment figure.
 Personality disorders.
 Dependent personality disorder is characterized by an indiscriminate
 tendency to rely on others, whereas separation anxiety disorder involves concern about the
 proximity and safety of key attachment figures. Borderline personality disorder is characterized
 by fear of abandonment by loved ones, but problems in identity, self-direction, interpersonal
 functioning, and impulsivity are additionally central to that disorder, whereas they are not central
 to separation anxiety disorder.
 Comorbidity
 In children, separation anxiety disorder is highly comorbid with generalized anxiety disorder and
specific phobia. In adults, common comorbidities include specific phobia, PTSD, panic disorder,
 generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive-compulsive
 disorder, prolonged grief disorder, and personality disorders. Among the personality disorders,
 dependent, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive (Cluster C) personality disorders may be
 comorbid with separation anxiety disorder. Depressive and bipolar disorders are also comorbid
 with separation anxiety disorder in adults.
 222