Selective Mutism
 F94.0
 A. Consistent failure to speak in specific social situations in which there is an
 expectation for speaking (e.g., at school) despite speaking in other situations.
 B. The disturbance interferes with educational or occupational achievement or with
 social communication.
 C. The duration of the disturbance is at least 1 month (not limited to the first month
 of school).
 D. The failure to speak is not attributable to a lack of knowledge of, or comfort with,
 the spoken language required in the social situation.
 E. The disturbance is not better explained by a communication disorder (e.g.,
 childhood-onset fluency disorder) and does not occur exclusively during the
 course of autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, or another psychotic
 disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 When encountering other individuals in social interactions, children with selective mutism do not
 initiate speech or reciprocally respond when spoken to by others. Lack of speech occurs in social
 interactions with children or adults. Children with selective mutism will speak in their home in
 the presence of immediate family members but often not even in front of close friends or second
degree relatives, such as grandparents or cousins. The disturbance is most often marked by high
 social anxiety. Children with selective mutism often refuse to speak at school, leading to
 academic or educational impairment, as teachers often find it difficult to assess skills such as
 reading. The lack of speech may interfere with social communication, although children with this
 disorder sometimes use nonspoken or nonverbal means (e.g., grunting, pointing, writing) to
 communicate and may be willing or eager to perform or engage in social encounters when
 speech is not required (e.g., nonverbal parts in school plays).
 Associated Features
 Associated features of selective mutism may include excessive shyness, fear of social
embarrassment, social isolation and withdrawal, clinging, compulsive traits, negativism, temper
 tantrums, or mild oppositional behavior. Although children with this disorder generally have
 normal language skills, there may occasionally be an associated communication disorder,
 although no particular association with a specific communication disorder has been identified.
 Even when these disorders are present, anxiety is present as well. In clinical settings, children
 with selective mutism are almost always given an additional diagnosis of another anxiety
 disorder—most commonly, social anxiety disorder.
 Prevalence
 Selective mutism is a relatively rare disorder and has not been included as a diagnostic category
 in epidemiological studies of prevalence of childhood disorders. Point prevalence using various
 clinic or school samples in the United States, Europe, and Israel ranges between 0.03% and 1.9%
 depending on the setting and ages of the sample. Studies in community-based and treatment
seeking samples suggest an equal gender distribution for selective mutism, although there is also
 evidence that selective mutism is more common among girls than boys. Prevalence does not
 seem to vary by race/ethnicity, but individuals who need to speak in a non-native language (e.g.,
 children of immigrant families) run greater risk for developing the disorder. The disorder is more
 likely to manifest in young children than in adolescents and adults.
 223
 Development and Course
 The onset of selective mutism is usually before age 5 years, but the disturbance may not come to
 clinical attention until entry into school, where there is an increase in social interaction and
 performance tasks, such as reading aloud. The persistence of the disorder is variable. Although
 clinical reports suggest that many individuals “outgrow” selective mutism, the longitudinal
 course of the disorder is largely unknown. In most cases, selective mutism may fade, but
 symptoms of social anxiety disorder often remain.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Temperamental risk factors for selective mutism are not well identified.
 Negative affectivity (neuroticism) or behavioral inhibition may play a role, as may parental
 history of shyness, social isolation, and social anxiety. Children with selective mutism may have
 subtle receptive language difficulties compared with their peers, although receptive language is
 still within the normal range.
 Environmental.
 Social inhibition on the part of parents may serve as a model for social reticence
 and selective mutism in children. Furthermore, parents of children with selective mutism have
 been described as overprotective or more controlling than parents of children with other anxiety
 disorders or no disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Because of the significant overlap between selective mutism and social
 anxiety disorder, there may be shared genetic factors between these conditions. There is also
 evidence for increased abnormalities in the auditory efferent neural activity during vocalization
 in individuals with selective mutism, which could lead to peculiarities in the perception of their
own voice and hence a reticence to speak.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Children in families who have migrated to a country where a different language is spoken may
 appear to have selective mutism because they may refuse to speak the new language because of
 lack of knowledge of the language. Such children would not qualify for the diagnosis because
 such cases are explicitly excluded from the diagnosis.
 Functional Consequences of Selective Mutism
 Selective mutism may result in social impairment, as children may be too anxious to engage in
 reciprocal social interaction with other children. As children with selective mutism mature, they
 may face increasing social isolation. In school settings, these children may suffer academic
 impairment, because often they do not communicate with teachers regarding their academic or
 personal needs (e.g., not understanding a class assignment, not asking to use the restroom).
 Severe impairment in school and social functioning, including that resulting from teasing by
 peers, is common. In certain instances, selective mutism may serve as a compensatory strategy to
 decrease anxious arousal in social encounters.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Silent period in immigrant children learning a second language.
 Selective 
mutism 
must 
be
 distinguished from the typical “silent period” associated with the acquisition of a new language
 in young children. If comprehension of the new language is adequate but refusal to speak persists
 in both languages, in several unfamiliar settings, and for a prolonged period, a diagnosis of
 selective mutism may be warranted.
 Communication disorders.
 Selective mutism should be distinguished from speech disturbances
 that are better explained by a communication disorder, such as language disorder, speech sound
 disorder (previously phonological disorder), childhood-onset
 224
 fluency disorder (stuttering), or social (pragmatic) communication disorder. Unlike selective
 mutism, the speech disturbance in these conditions is not restricted to a specific social situation.
 Individuals with an
 Neurodevelopmental disorders and schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
 autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder, or severe intellectual
 developmental disorder (intellectual disability) may have problems in social communication and
 be unable to speak appropriately in social situations. In contrast, selective mutism should be
 diagnosed only when a child has an established capacity to speak in some social situations (e.g.,
 typically at home).
 Social anxiety disorder.
 The social anxiety and social avoidance in social anxiety disorder may be
 associated with selective mutism. In such cases, both diagnoses may be given.
 Comorbidity
 The most common comorbid conditions are other anxiety disorders, most often social anxiety
disorder, followed by separation anxiety disorder and specific phobia. In clinical settings,
 selective mutism and autism spectrum disorder have also been noted as frequently co-occurring
 conditions. Oppositional behaviors can be observed in a substantial minority of children with
 selective mutism, although this oppositional behavior may be limited to situations requiring
 speech. Communication delays or disorders also may appear in some children with selective
 mutism.