Anxiety Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Panic attacks or anxiety is predominant in the clinical picture.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
 medical condition.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition within the name of the
 F06.4
mental disorder (e.g., F06.4 anxiety disorder due to pheochromocytoma). The other
 259
 medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the
 anxiety disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., D35.00 pheochromocytoma;
 F06.4 anxiety disorder due to pheochromocytoma).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is clinically significant
 anxiety that is judged to be best explained as a physiological effect of another medical condition.
 Symptoms can include prominent anxiety symptoms or panic attacks (Criterion A). The
 judgment that the symptoms are best explained by the associated physical condition must be
 based on evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B).
 Additionally, it must be judged that the symptoms are not better accounted for by another mental
 disorder (Criterion C)—in particular, adjustment disorder with anxiety, in which the stressor is
 the medical condition. In this case, an individual with adjustment disorder is especially distressed
 about the meaning or the consequences of the associated medical condition. By contrast, there is
 often a prominent physical component to the anxiety (e.g., shortness of breath) when the anxiety
 is due to another medical condition. The diagnosis is not made if the anxiety symptoms occur
 only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The anxiety symptoms must cause clinically
 significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
 (Criterion E).
 In determining whether the anxiety symptoms are attributable to another medical condition,
 the clinician must first establish the presence of the medical condition. Furthermore, it must be
 established that anxiety symptoms can be etiologically related to the medical condition through a
 physiological mechanism before making a judgment that this is the best explanation for the
 symptoms in a specific individual. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is
 necessary to make this judgment. Several aspects of the clinical presentation should be
 considered: 1) the presence of a clear temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or
 remission of the medical condition and the anxiety symptoms; 2) the presence of features that are
 atypical of an independent anxiety disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course); and 3)
 evidence in the literature that a known physiological mechanism (e.g., hyperthyroidism) causes
 anxiety. In addition, the disturbance must not be better explained by an independent anxiety
 disorder, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, or another mental disorder (e.g.,
 adjustment disorder).
 A number of medical conditions are known to include anxiety as a symptomatic
 manifestation. Examples include endocrine disease (e.g., hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
 hypoglycemia, hyperadrenocortisolism), cardiovascular disorders (e.g., congestive heart failure,
 pulmonary embolism, arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation), respiratory illness (e.g., chronic
 obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, pneumonia), metabolic disturbances (e.g., vitamin B12
 deficiency, porphyria), and neurological illness (e.g., neoplasms, vestibular dysfunction,
 encephalitis, seizure disorders).
Prevalence
 The prevalence of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is unclear. There appears to
 be an elevated prevalence of anxiety disorders among individuals with a variety of medical
 conditions, including asthma, hypertension, ulcers, and arthritis. However, this increased
 prevalence may be due to reasons other than the anxiety disorder directly causing the medical
 condition.
 Development and Course
 The development and course of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition generally
 follows the course of the underlying illness. This diagnosis is not meant to include primary
 anxiety disorders that arise in the context of chronic medical illness. This is
 260
 important to consider with older adults, who may experience chronic medical illness and then
 develop independent anxiety disorders secondary to the chronic medical illness.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory assessments and/or medical examinations are necessary to confirm the diagnosis of
 the associated medical condition.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 A separate diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to
 another medical condition is not given if the anxiety disturbance occurs exclusively during the
 course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
 may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the anxiety is
 judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive
 disorder and if anxiety is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
 Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety).
 If the presentation includes a mix of
 different types of symptoms, the specific mental disorder due to another medical condition
 depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical picture.
 Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance
 use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure
 to a toxin, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder should be considered. Certain
 medications are known to increase anxiety (e.g., corticosteroids, estrogens, metoclopramide), and
 when this is the case, the medication may be the most likely etiology, although it may be difficult
 to distinguish whether the anxiety is attributable to the medications or to the medical illness
 itself. When a diagnosis of substance-induced anxiety is being made in relation to recreational or
 nonprescribed drugs, it may be useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate
 laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that develop during or soon after substance intoxication or
 withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/medication
induced anxiety disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance used. If
 the disturbance is associated with both another medical condition and substance use, both
Anxiety disorder (not due to a known medical condition).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Adjustment disorders.
 diagnoses (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication
induced anxiety disorder) can be given. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence
 of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder
 or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition
 or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical
 condition should be distinguished from other anxiety disorders (especially panic disorder and
 generalized anxiety disorder). In other anxiety disorders, no specific and direct causative
 physiological mechanisms associated with another medical condition can be demonstrated. Late
 age at onset, atypical symptoms, and the absence of a personal or family history of anxiety
 disorders suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagnosis of anxiety disorder
 due to another medical condition. Anxiety disorders can exacerbate or pose increased risk for
 medical conditions such as cardiovascular events and myocardial infarction and should not be
 diagnosed as anxiety disorder due to another medical condition in these cases.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be
 distinguished from illness anxiety disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by worry
 about illness, concern about pain, and bodily preoccupations. In the case of illness anxiety
 disorder, individuals may or may not have diagnosed medical conditions. Although
 261
 an individual with illness anxiety disorder and a diagnosed medical condition is likely to
 experience anxiety about the medical condition, the medical condition is not physiologically
 related to the anxiety symptoms.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished
 from adjustment disorders with anxiety or adjustment disorders with anxiety and depressed
 mood. Adjustment disorder is warranted when individuals experience a maladaptive response to
 the stress of being diagnosed with or having to manage the medical condition. The reaction to
 stress usually concerns the meaning or consequences of the medical condition, in contrast with
 the experience of anxiety or mood symptoms that occur as a physiological consequence of the
 medical condition. In adjustment disorder, the anxiety symptoms are typically related to coping
 with the stress of having the medical condition, whereas in anxiety disorder due to another
 medical condition, individuals are more likely to have prominent physical symptoms and to be
 focused on issues other than the stress of the illness itself.