Panic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recurrent unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense
 fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which
 time four (or more) of the following symptoms occur:
 Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
 1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
 3. Trembling or shaking.
 4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
 5. Feelings of choking.
 6. Chest pain or discomfort.
 7. Nausea or abdominal distress.
 8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.
 9. Chills or heat sensations.
 236
 10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
 11. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from
 oneself).
 12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
 13. Fear of dying.
 Note: Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache,
 uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen. Such symptoms should not
 count as one of the four required symptoms.
 B. At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more) of one or
 both of the following:
 1. Persistent concern or worry about additional panic attacks or their
 consequences (e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, “going crazy”).
 2. A significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the attacks (e.g.,
 behaviors designed to avoid having panic attacks, such as avoidance of
 exercise or unfamiliar situations).
 C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
 hyperthyroidism, cardiopulmonary disorders).
 D. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the
 panic attacks do not occur only in response to feared social situations, as in
 social anxiety disorder; in response to circumscribed phobic objects or situations,
 as in specific phobia; in response to obsessions, as in obsessive-compulsive
 disorder; in response to reminders of traumatic events, as in posttraumatic stress
 disorder; or in response to separation from attachment figures, as in separation
 anxiety disorder).
 Diagnostic Features
 Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent unexpected panic attacks (Criterion A). (For a
 detailed description of symptoms and course characterizing a panic attack, see Panic Attack
Specifier, “Features” section, following this text on panic disorder.) A panic attack is an abrupt
 surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which
 time 4 or more of a list of 13 physical and cognitive symptoms occur. The term recurrent means
 more than one unexpected panic attack. The term unexpected refers to a panic attack for which
 there is no obvious cue or trigger at the time of occurrence—that is, the attack appears to occur
 from out of the blue, such as when the individual is relaxing or emerging from sleep (nocturnal
 panic attack). In contrast, expected panic attacks are those for which there is an obvious cue or
 trigger, such as a situation in which panic attacks have typically occurred. The determination of
 whether panic attacks are expected or unexpected is made by the clinician, who makes this
 judgment based on a combination of careful questioning as to the sequence of events preceding
 or leading up to the attack and the individual’s own judgment of whether the attack seemed to
 occur for no apparent reason. Cultural interpretations may influence the assignment of panic
 attacks as expected or unexpected (see section “Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues” for this
 disorder). In the United States and Europe, approximately one-half of individuals with panic
 disorder have expected panic attacks as well as unexpected panic attacks. Thus, the presence of
 expected panic attacks does not rule out the diagnosis of panic disorder.
 The frequency and severity of panic attacks vary widely. In terms of frequency, there may be
 moderately frequent attacks (e.g., one per week) for months at a time, or short bursts of more
 frequent attacks (e.g., daily) separated by weeks or months without any attacks or with less
 frequent attacks (e.g., two per month) over many years. Individuals who have infrequent panic
 attacks resemble those with more frequent panic attacks in terms of panic attack symptoms,
 demographic characteristics, comorbidity with other disorders, family
 237
 history, and biological data. In terms of severity, individuals with panic disorder may have
 both full-symptom (four or more symptoms) and limited-symptom (fewer than four symptoms)
 attacks, and the number and type of panic attack symptoms frequently differ from one panic
 attack to the next. However, more than one unexpected full-symptom panic attack is required for
 the diagnosis of panic disorder.
 A nocturnal panic attack (i.e., waking from sleep in a state of panic) differs from panicking
 after fully waking from sleep. In the United States, nocturnal panic attack has been estimated to
 occur at least one time in roughly one-quarter to one-third of individuals with panic disorder, of
 whom the majority also have daytime panic attacks. Individuals with both daytime and nocturnal
 panic attacks tend to have more severe panic disorder overall.
 The worries about panic attacks or their consequences usually pertain to physical concerns,
 such as worry that panic attacks reflect the presence of life-threatening illnesses (e.g., cardiac
 disease, seizure disorder); social concerns, such as embarrassment or fear of being judged
 negatively by others because of visible panic symptoms; and concerns about mental functioning,
 such as “going crazy” or losing control (Criterion B). Individuals who report fears of dying in
 their panic attacks tend to have more severe presentations of panic disorder (e.g., panic attacks
 involving more symptoms). The maladaptive changes in behavior represent attempts to minimize
 or avoid panic attacks or their consequences. Examples include avoiding physical exertion,
 reorganizing daily life to ensure that help is available in the event of a panic attack, restricting
 usual daily activities, and avoiding agoraphobia-type situations, such as leaving home, using
public transportation, or shopping. If agoraphobia is present, a separate diagnosis of agoraphobia
 is given.
 Associated Features
 In addition to worry about panic attacks and their consequences, many individuals with panic
 disorder report constant or intermittent feelings of anxiety that are more broadly related to health
 and mental health concerns. For example, individuals with panic disorder often anticipate a
 catastrophic outcome from a mild physical symptom or medication side effect (e.g., thinking that
 they may have heart disease or that a headache means presence of a brain tumor). Such
 individuals often are relatively intolerant of medication side effects. In addition, there may be
 pervasive concerns about abilities to complete daily tasks or withstand daily stressors, excessive
 use of drugs (e.g., alcohol, prescribed medications or illicit drugs) to control panic attacks, or
 extreme behaviors aimed at controlling panic attacks (e.g., severe restrictions on food intake or
 avoidance of specific foods or medications because of concerns about physical symptoms that
 provoke panic attacks).
 Prevalence
 In the general population, the 12-month prevalence estimate for panic disorder across the United
 States and several European countries is about 2%–3% in adults and adolescents. The global
 lifetime prevalence is estimated at 1.7%, with a 2.7% projected lifetime risk in the World Mental
 Health Surveys. In the United States, significantly lower prevalence estimates of panic disorder
 are reported among Latinx, African Americans, Caribbean Blacks, and Asian Americans,
 compared with non-Latinx Whites. Prevalence estimates of panic disorder in American Indians
 range from 2.6% to 4.1%. Lower estimates have been reported for Asian, African, and Latin
 American countries, ranging from 0.1% to 0.8%. Women are more frequently affected than men,
 at a rate of approximately 2:1. The gender differentiation occurs in adolescence and is already
 observable before age 14 years. Although panic attacks occur in children, the overall prevalence
 of panic disorder is low before age 14 years (<0.4%). The rates of panic disorder show a gradual
 increase during adolescence and possibly following the onset of puberty, and peak during
 adulthood. The prevalence declines in older individuals (i.e., 1.2% in adults older than age 55,
 0.7% in adults older than age 64), possibly reflecting diminishing severity to subclinical levels.
 238
 Development and Course
 The median age at onset for panic disorder in the United States is 20–24 years, and cross
nationally is 32 years. The mean age at onset is 34.7 years. A small number of cases begin in
 childhood, and onset after age 55 years is unusual but can occur. The usual course, if the disorder
 is untreated, is chronic but waxing and waning. Some individuals may have episodic outbreaks
 with years of remission in between, and others may have continuous severe symptomatology.
 According to a longitudinal study in the Netherlands, about one-quarter of the individuals with
 panic disorder experienced recurrence of symptoms within the initial 2-year follow-up period.
 Only a minority of individuals have full remission without subsequent relapse within a few
 years. The course of panic disorder typically is complicated by a range of other disorders, in
particular other anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, and substance use disorders (see section
 “Comorbidity” for this disorder). African American adults have been reported to have a more
 chronic course of panic disorder compared with non-Latinx White adults, possibly because of the
 enduring impact of racism and discrimination, stigma due to mental illness, and limited access to
 adequate care.
 Although panic disorder is very rare in childhood, first occurrence of “fearful spells” is often
 dated retrospectively back to childhood. As in adults, panic disorder in adolescents tends to have
 a chronic course and is frequently comorbid with other anxiety, depressive, and bipolar
 disorders. To date, no differences in the clinical presentation between adolescents and adults
 have been found. However, adolescents may be less worried about additional panic attacks than
 are young adults. Lower prevalence of panic disorder in older adults appears to be attributable to
 age-related “dampening” of the autonomic nervous system response. Many older individuals
 with “panicky feelings” are observed to have a “hybrid” of limited-symptom panic attacks and
 generalized anxiety. Also, older adults tend to attribute their panic attacks to certain stressful
 situations, such as a medical procedure or social setting. Older individuals may retrospectively
 endorse explanations for the panic attack (which would preclude the diagnosis of panic disorder),
 even if an attack might actually have been unexpected in the moment (and thus qualify as the
 basis for a panic disorder diagnosis). This may result in under-endorsement of unexpected panic
 attacks in older individuals. Thus, careful questioning of older adults is required to assess
 whether panic attacks were expected before entering the situation, so that unexpected panic
 attacks and the diagnosis of panic disorder are not overlooked.
 While the low rate of panic disorder in children could relate to difficulties in symptom
 reporting, this seems unlikely given that children are capable of reporting intense fear or panic in
 relation to separation and to phobic objects or phobic situations. Adolescents might be less
 willing than adults to openly discuss panic attacks. Therefore, clinicians should be aware that
 unexpected panic attacks do occur in adolescents, much as they do in adults, and be attuned to
 this possibility when encountering adolescents presenting with episodes of intense fear or
 distress.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Negative affectivity (neuroticism) (i.e., proneness to experiencing negative
 emotions), anxiety sensitivity (i.e., the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are
 harmful), behavioral inhibition, and harm avoidance are risk factors for the onset of panic attacks
 and panic disorder. History of “fearful spells” (i.e., limited-symptom attacks that do not meet full
 criteria for a panic attack) may be a risk factor for later panic attacks and panic disorder,
 particularly when the first panic experience is appraised as negative. Although separation anxiety
 in childhood, especially when severe, may precede the later development of panic disorder, it is
 not a consistent risk factor.
 Environmental.
 Most individuals report identifiable stressors in the months before their first panic
 attack (e.g., interpersonal stressors and stressors related to physical well-being,
 239
 such as negative experiences with illicit or prescription drugs, disease, or death in the family).
Furthermore, more chronic life stress is associated with greater panic disorder severity. Between
 10% and 60% of individuals with panic disorder endorse a history of trauma, and stressful life
 experiences and childhood adversities are associated with more severe panic pathology. Parental
 overprotection and low emotional warmth are also risk factors for panic disorder. Individuals
 with few economic resources are more likely to have symptoms that meet criteria for panic
 disorder. Smoking is a risk factor for panic attacks and panic disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Multiple genes likely confer vulnerability to panic disorder; however,
 the exact genes, gene products, or functions related to the genetic regions implicated remain
 unknown. There is an increased risk for panic disorder among offspring of parents with anxiety,
 depressive, and bipolar disorders.
 Individuals with panic disorder display particularly enhanced sensitivity to respiratory
 stimulation using CO2-enriched air. Respiratory disturbance, such as asthma, may be associated
 with panic disorder, in terms of past history, comorbidity, and family history.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The rate of fears about mental and somatic symptoms of anxiety appears to vary across cultural
 contexts and may influence the rate of panic attacks and panic disorder. Also, cultural
 expectations may influence the classification of panic attacks as expected or unexpected. For
 example, a Vietnamese individual who has a panic attack after walking out into a windy
 environment (trúng gió; “hit by the wind”) may attribute the panic attack to exposure to wind as
 a result of the cultural syndrome that links these two experiences, resulting in classification of
 the panic attack as expected. Various other cultural concepts of distress are associated with panic
 disorder, including ataque de nervios (“attack of nerves”) among Latin Americans and khyâl
 attacks and “soul loss” among Cambodians. Ataque de nervios may involve trembling,
 uncontrollable screaming or crying, aggressive or suicidal behavior, and depersonalization or
 derealization, which may be experienced longer than the few minutes typical of panic attacks.
 Some clinical presentations of ataque de nervios fulfill criteria for conditions other than panic
 attack (e.g., functional neurological symptom disorder). These concepts of distress have an
 impact on the symptoms and frequency of panic disorder, including the individual’s attribution
 of unexpectedness, as cultural concepts of distress may create fear of certain situations, ranging
 from interpersonal arguments (associated with ataque de nervios), to types of exertion
 (associated with khyâl attacks), to atmospheric wind (associated with trúng gió attacks).
 Clarification of the details of cultural attributions may aid in distinguishing expected and
 unexpected panic attacks. For more information regarding cultural concepts of distress, refer to
 the “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis” chapter in Section III.
 The specific worries about panic attacks or their consequences are likely to vary across
 ethnoracial groups and cultural contexts (and across different age groups and gender). Among
 Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans, and African Americans in the United States, panic
 disorder is associated with reports of ethnic discrimination and racism, after the effect of
 demographic factors is taken into account. For panic disorder, U.S. community samples of non
Latinx Whites have significantly less functional impairment than African Americans. There are
 also higher rates of objectively defined severity in non-Latinx Caribbean Blacks with panic
 disorder, and lower reported rates of panic disorder overall in both African Americans and
 Caribbean Blacks, suggesting that among U.S. community samples of African descent, panic
disorder criteria may be endorsed only when there is substantial severity and impairment. The
 rate of mental health service use for panic disorder varies across ethnoracial groups.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The rate of panic disorder is nearly twofold higher in women compared with men. Relapse from
 panic disorder also occurs more frequently in adult women compared with men,
 240
 suggesting that women have a more unstable illness course. Gender differences in clinical course
 are also found among adolescents. Panic disorder has a larger impact on health-related quality of
 life in women than in men, which may be attributable to greater anxiety sensitivity among some
 women or greater comorbidity with agoraphobia and depression. There is some evidence for
 sexual dimorphism, with high expression of MAOA-uVNTR alleles potentially acting as a
 female-specific risk factor for panic disorder.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Individuals with panic disorder exhibit an attentional bias to threatening stimuli. Panic attacks
 may be provoked by agents with disparate mechanisms of action, such as sodium lactate,
 caffeine, isoproterenol, yohimbine, CO2, and cholecystokinin, to a much greater extent in
 individuals with panic disorder than in those without it. There is considerable interest in the
 relationship between panic disorder and sensitivity to these panic-provoking agents. While none
 of the data suggest diagnostic utility, data for sensitivity to respiratory stimulation reflect some
 level of specificity for panic disorder and related conditions, such as separation anxiety disorder.
 Chronically higher baseline hyperventilation and rate of sighing may occur among individuals
 with panic disorder. However, none of these laboratory findings are considered diagnostic of
 panic disorder.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Panic attacks and a diagnosis of panic disorder in the past 12 months are related to a higher rate
 of suicidal behavior and suicidal thoughts in the past 12 months even when comorbidity and a
 history of childhood abuse and other suicide risk factors are taken into account. Approximately
 25% of primary care patients with panic disorder report suicidal thoughts. Panic disorder may
 increase risk for future suicidal behaviors but not deaths.
 Epidemiological survey data of panic attack symptoms show that the cognitive symptoms of
 panic (e.g., derealization) may be associated with suicidal thoughts, whereas physical symptoms
 (e.g., dizziness, nausea) may be associated with suicidal behaviors.
 Functional Consequences of Panic Disorder
 Panic disorder is associated with high levels of social, occupational, and physical disability;
 considerable economic costs; and the highest number of medical visits among the anxiety
 disorders, although the effects are strongest with the presence of agoraphobia. Individuals with
 panic disorder may be frequently absent from work or school for doctor and emergency room
visits, which can lead to unemployment or dropping out of school. In older adults, impairment
 may be seen in caregiving duties or volunteer activities, and panic disorder is related to lower
 health-related quality of life and greater receipt of emergency department services. Full-symptom
 panic attacks typically are associated with greater morbidity (e.g., greater health care utilization,
 more disability, poorer quality of life) than limited-symptom attacks.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Only limited-symptom panic attacks.
 Panic disorder should not be diagnosed if full-symptom
 (unexpected) panic attacks have never been experienced. In the case of only limited-symptom
 unexpected panic attacks, an other specified anxiety disorder or unspecified anxiety disorder
 diagnosis should be considered.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic
 attacks are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Examples of medical conditions that can cause panic attacks include hyperthyroidism,
 hyperparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure
 241
 disorders, and cardiopulmonary conditions (e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia,
 asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]). Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g.,
 serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism; Holter monitor for arrhythmias) or physical
 examinations (e.g., for cardiac conditions) may be helpful in determining the etiological role of
 another medical condition. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical
 symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel
 control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition or a
 substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic attacks
 are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a substance. Intoxication with central
 nervous system stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine-type substances, caffeine) or cannabis
 and withdrawal from central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can
 precipitate a panic attack.
 However, if panic attacks continue to occur outside of the context of substance use (e.g., long
 after the effects of intoxication or withdrawal have ended), a diagnosis of panic disorder should
 be considered. In addition, because panic disorder may precede substance use in some
 individuals and may be associated with increased substance use, especially for purposes of self
medication, a detailed history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks
 prior to excessive substance use. If this is the case, a diagnosis of panic disorder should be
 considered in addition to a diagnosis of substance use disorder. Features such as onset after age
 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of
 consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility
 that another medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Other mental disorders with panic attacks as an associated feature (e.g., other anxiety disorders
 and psychotic disorders).
 Panic attacks that occur as a symptom of other anxiety disorders are expected (e.g., triggered by
social situations in social anxiety disorder, by phobic objects or situations in specific phobia or
 agoraphobia, by worry in generalized anxiety disorder, by separation from home or attachment
 figures in separation anxiety disorder) and thus would not meet criteria for panic disorder. (Note:
 Sometimes an unexpected panic attack is associated with the onset of another anxiety disorder,
 but then the attacks become expected, whereas panic disorder is characterized by recurrent
 unexpected panic attacks.) If the panic attacks occur only in response to specific triggers, then
 only the relevant anxiety disorder is assigned. However, if the individual experiences unexpected
 panic attacks as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of
 the attacks, then an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.
 Comorbidity
 Panic disorder infrequently occurs in clinical settings in the absence of other psychopathology. In
 the general population, 80% of individuals with panic disorder had a lifetime comorbid mental
 diagnosis. The prevalence of panic disorder is elevated in individuals with other disorders,
 particularly other anxiety disorders (and especially agoraphobia), major depressive disorder,
 bipolar I and bipolar II disorder, and possibly mild alcohol use disorder. While panic disorder
 occasionally has an earlier age at onset than the comorbid disorder(s), onset often occurs after the
 comorbid disorder and may be seen as a severity marker of the comorbid illness.
 Reported lifetime rates of comorbidity between major depressive disorder and panic disorder
 vary widely, ranging from 10% to 65% in individuals with panic disorder. In approximately one
third of individuals with both disorders, the depression precedes the onset of panic disorder. In
 the remaining two-thirds, depression occurs coincident with or following the onset of panic
 disorder. A subset of individuals with panic disorder develop a
 242
 substance-related disorder, which for some represents an attempt to treat their anxiety with
 alcohol or medications. Comorbidity with other anxiety disorders and illness anxiety disorder is
 also common.
 Panic disorder is significantly comorbid with numerous general medical symptoms and
 conditions, including, but not limited to, dizziness, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperthyroidism,
 asthma, COPD, and irritable bowel syndrome. However, the nature of the association (e.g., cause
 and effect) between panic disorder and these conditions remains unclear. Although mitral valve
 prolapse and thyroid disease are more common among individuals with panic disorder than in the
 general population, the increases in prevalence are not consistent.