 Social Anxiety Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social situations in which the individual
 is exposed to possible scrutiny by others. Examples include social interactions
 (e.g., having a conversation, meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (e.g.,
 eating or drinking), and performing in front of others (e.g., giving a speech).
 Note: In children, the anxiety must occur in peer settings and not just during
 interactions with adults.
 B. The individual fears that he or she will act in a way or show anxiety symptoms
 that will be negatively evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating or embarrassing; will
 lead to rejection or offend others).
 C. The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
 Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums,
 freezing, clinging, shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations.
 D. The social situations are avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety.
 E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the social
 situation and to the sociocultural context.
 230
F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or
 more.
 G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 H. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
 substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
 I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of
 another mental disorder, such as panic disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, or
 autism spectrum disorder.
 J. If another medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, obesity, disfigurement
 from burns or injury) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly
 unrelated or is excessive.
 Specify if:
 Performance only: If the fear is restricted to speaking or performing in public.
 Specifiers
 Individuals with the performance only type of social anxiety disorder have performance fears
 that are typically most impairing in their professional lives (e.g., musicians, dancers, performers,
 athletes) or in roles that require regular public speaking. Performance fears may also manifest in
 work, school, or academic settings in which regular public presentations are required. Individuals
 with performance only social anxiety disorder do not fear or avoid nonperformance social
 situations.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of social anxiety disorder is a marked, or intense, fear or anxiety of social
 situations in which the individual may be scrutinized by others. In children the fear or anxiety
 must occur in peer settings and not just during interactions with adults (Criterion A). When
 exposed to such social situations, the individual fears that he or she will be negatively evaluated.
 The individual is concerned that he or she will be judged as anxious, weak, crazy, stupid, boring,
 intimidating, dirty, or unlikable. The individual fears that he or she will act or appear in a certain
 way or show anxiety symptoms, such as blushing, trembling, sweating, stumbling over one’s
 words, or staring, that will be negatively evaluated by others (Criterion B). Some individuals fear
 offending others or being rejected as a result. Fear of offending others—for example, by a gaze
 or by showing anxiety symptoms—may be the predominant fear in individuals from cultures
 with strong collectivistic orientations. An individual with fear of trembling of the hands may
 avoid drinking, eating, writing, or pointing in public; an individual with fear of sweating may
 avoid shaking hands or eating spicy foods; and an individual with fear of blushing may avoid
 public performance, bright lights, or discussion about intimate topics. Some individuals fear and
 avoid urinating in public restrooms when other individuals are present (i.e., paruresis, or “shy
 bladder syndrome”).
 The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety (Criterion C). Thus, an individual
 who becomes anxious only occasionally in the social situation(s) would not be diagnosed with
social anxiety disorder. However, the degree and type of fear and anxiety may vary (e.g.,
 anticipatory anxiety, a panic attack) across different occasions. The anticipatory anxiety may
 occur sometimes far in advance of upcoming situations (e.g., worrying every day for weeks
 before attending a social event, repeating a speech for days in advance). In children, the fear or
 anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, clinging, or shrinking in social
 situations. The individual will often avoid the feared social situations. Alternatively, the
 situations are endured with intense fear or anxiety (Criterion D). Avoidance can be extensive
 (e.g., not going to parties, refusing school) or subtle (e.g., overpreparing the text of a speech,
 diverting attention to others, limiting eye contact).
 The fear or anxiety is judged to be out of proportion to the actual risk of being negatively
 evaluated or to the consequences of such negative evaluation (Criterion E).
 231
 Sometimes, the anxiety may not be judged to be excessive, because it is related to an actual
 danger (e.g., being bullied or tormented by others). However, individuals with social anxiety
 disorder often overestimate the negative consequences of social situations, and thus the judgment
 of being out of proportion is made by the clinician. The individual’s sociocultural context needs
 to be taken into account when this judgment is being made. For example, in certain cultures,
 behavior that might otherwise appear socially anxious may be considered appropriate in social
 situations (e.g., might be seen as a sign of respect).
 The duration of the disturbance is typically at least 6 months (Criterion F). This duration
 threshold helps distinguish the disorder from transient social fears that are common, particularly
 among children and in the community. The fear, anxiety, and avoidance must interfere
 significantly with the individual’s normal routine, occupational or academic functioning, or
 social activities or relationships, or must cause clinically significant distress (Criterion G). For
 example, an individual who is afraid to speak in public would not receive a diagnosis of social
 anxiety disorder if this activity is not routinely encountered on the job or in classroom work, and
 if the individual is not significantly distressed about it. However, if the individual avoids, or is
 passed over for, the job or education he or she really wants because of social anxiety symptoms,
 Criterion G is met.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with social anxiety disorder may be inadequately assertive or excessively submissive
 or, less commonly, highly controlling of the conversation. They may show overly rigid body
 posture or inadequate eye contact, or speak with an overly soft voice. These individuals may be
 shy or withdrawn, and they may be less open in conversations and disclose little about
 themselves. They may seek employment in jobs that do not require social contact, although this
 is not the case for individuals with social anxiety disorder, performance only. They may live at
 home longer. Men may be delayed in marrying and having a family, whereas women who would
 want to work outside the home may live a life without ever doing so. Self-medication with
 substances is common (e.g., drinking before going to a party). Social anxiety among older adults
 may also include exacerbation of symptoms of medical illnesses, such as increased tremor or
 tachycardia. Blushing is a hallmark physical response of social anxiety disorder.
Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence estimate of social anxiety disorder for the United States is
 approximately 7%. Lower 12-month prevalence estimates are seen in much of the world using
 the same diagnostic instrument, clustering around 0.5%–2.0%; median prevalence in Europe is
 2.3%. Prevalence appears to be increasing in the United States and East Asian countries. Twelve
month prevalence rates in young adolescents (ages 13–17 years) are roughly half those in adults.
 Twelve-month prevalence rates decrease after age 65. The 12-month prevalence for older adults
 in North America, Europe, and Australia ranges from 2% to 5%. In general, higher rates of social
 anxiety disorder are found in women than in men in the general population (with odds ratios
 ranging from 1.5 to 2.2), and the gender difference in prevalence is more pronounced in
 adolescents and young adults. Gender rates are equivalent or slightly higher for men in clinical
 samples, and it is assumed that gender roles and social expectations play a significant role in
 explaining the heightened help-seeking behavior in men. Prevalence in the United States has
 been found to be lower in individuals of Asian, Latinx, African American, and Caribbean Black
 descent compared with non-Hispanic Whites.
 Development and Course
 Median age at onset of social anxiety disorder in the United States is 13 years, and 75% of
 individuals have an age at onset between 8 and 15 years. The disorder sometimes emerges
 232
 out of a childhood history of social inhibition or shyness in U.S. and European studies. Onset can
 also occur in early childhood. Onset of social anxiety disorder may follow a stressful or
 humiliating experience (e.g., being bullied, vomiting during a public speech), or it may be
 insidious, developing slowly. First onset in adulthood is relatively rare and is more likely to
 occur after a stressful or humiliating event or after life changes that require new social roles (e.g.,
 marrying someone from a different social class, receiving a job promotion). Social anxiety
 disorder may diminish after an individual with fear of dating marries and may reemerge after
 divorce. Among individuals presenting to clinical care, the disorder tends to be particularly
 persistent.
 Adolescents endorse a broader pattern of fear and avoidance, including of dating, compared
 with younger children. Older adults express social anxiety at lower levels but across a broader
 range of situations, whereas younger adults express higher levels of social anxiety for specific
 situations. In older adults, social anxiety may concern disability due to declining sensory
 functioning (hearing, vision) or embarrassment about one’s appearance (e.g., tremor as a
 symptom of Parkinson’s disease) or functioning due to medical conditions, incontinence, or
 cognitive impairment (e.g., forgetting people’s names). Detection of social anxiety disorder in
 older adults may be challenging because of several factors, including a focus on somatic
 symptoms, comorbid medical illness, limited insight, changes to social environment or roles that
 may obscure impairment in social functioning, or reticence about describing psychological
 distress. There is large variation in rates of remission for social anxiety disorder, suggestive of
 different trajectories (short, fluctuating, and chronic).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Underlying traits that predispose individuals to social anxiety disorder include
 behavioral inhibition and fear of negative evaluation, as well as harm avoidance. Personality
 traits consistently associated with social anxiety disorder are high negative affectivity
 (neuroticism) and low extraversion.
 Environmental.
 There is evidence that negative social experiences, particularly peer victimization,
 are associated with the development of social anxiety disorder, although causal pathways remain
 unknown. Childhood maltreatment and adversity are risk factors for social anxiety disorder.
 Among African Americans and Caribbean Blacks in the United States, everyday forms of ethnic
 discrimination and racism are associated with social anxiety disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Traits predisposing individuals to social anxiety disorder, such as
 behavioral inhibition, are strongly genetically influenced. The genetic influence is subject to
 gene-environment interaction; that is, children with high behavioral inhibition are more
 susceptible to environmental influences, such as socially anxious modeling by parents. Also,
 social anxiety disorder is heritable. First-degree relatives have a two to six times greater chance
 of having social anxiety disorder, and liability to the disorder involves the interplay of disorder
specific (e.g., fear of negative evaluation) and nonspecific (e.g., negative affectivity
 [neuroticism]) genetic factors. Genetic contribution to social anxiety disorder has been found to
 be higher for social anxiety disorder in children than social anxiety disorder in adults and higher
 for social anxiety symptoms than a clinical diagnosis of social anxiety disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The nature and types of social situations that precipitate symptoms of social anxiety disorder are
 similar across U.S. ethnoracial groups, including fear of performance/public speaking, social
 interaction, and being observed. U.S. non-Latinx Whites report an earlier age at onset of social
 anxiety disorder than U.S. Latinx, yet the latter describe greater impairment across home, work,
 and relationship domains associated with the disorder.
 233
 Immigrant status is associated with lower rates of social anxiety disorder in both Latinx and non
Latinx White groups. The syndrome of taijin kyofusho (e.g., in Japan and Korea) is often
 characterized by social-evaluative concerns, fulfilling criteria for social anxiety disorder, which
 are associated with the fear that the individual makes other people uncomfortable (e.g., “My gaze
 upsets people so they look away and avoid me”), a fear that is at times experienced with
 delusional intensity. Other presentations of taijin kyofusho may fulfill criteria for body
 dysmorphic disorder or delusional disorder.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Age at onset of social anxiety disorder does not differ by gender. Women with social anxiety
 disorder report a greater number of social fears and comorbid major depressive disorder and
 other anxiety disorders, whereas men are more likely to fear dating; have oppositional defiant
 disorder, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder; and use alcohol and illicit drugs to
relieve symptoms of the disorder. Paruresis is more common in men.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Among U.S. adolescents, social anxiety disorder has been reported to increase the risk for active
 suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts in Latinx but not in non-Latinx Whites, independently of
 the effect of major depression and family income.
 Functional Consequences of Social Anxiety Disorder
 Social anxiety disorder is associated with elevated rates of school dropout and with decreased
 well-being, employment, workplace productivity, socioeconomic status, and quality of life.
 Social anxiety disorder is also associated with being single, unmarried, or divorced and with not
 having children, particularly among men, whereas women are more likely to be unemployed.
 Social anxiety disorder is also negatively associated with friendship quality, such that individuals
 with social anxiety disorder report having friendships that are less close and less supportive than
 persons without the disorder. In older adults, there may be impairment in caregiving duties and
 volunteer activities. Social anxiety disorder also impedes leisure activities. Despite the extent of
 distress and social impairment associated with social anxiety disorder, only about half of
 individuals with the disorder in high-income societies ever seek treatment, and they tend to do so
 only after 15–20 years of experiencing symptoms. Not being employed is a strong predictor for
 the persistence of social anxiety disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Normative shyness.
 Shyness (i.e., social reticence) is a common personality trait and is not by
 itself pathological. In some societies, shyness is even evaluated positively. However, when there
 is a significant adverse impact on social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning,
 a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be considered, and when full diagnostic criteria for
 social anxiety disorder are met, the disorder should be diagnosed. Only a minority (12%) of self
identified shy individuals in the United States have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for
 social anxiety disorder.
 Agoraphobia.
 Individuals with agoraphobia may fear and avoid social situations (e.g., going to a
 movie) because escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of
 incapacitation or panic-like symptoms, whereas individuals with social anxiety disorder are most
 fearful of scrutiny by others. Moreover, individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely to be
 calm when left entirely alone, which is often not the case in agoraphobia.
 234
 Panic disorder.
 Individuals with social anxiety disorder may have panic attacks, but the panic
 attacks are always cued by social situations and do not occur “out of the blue.” Additionally,
 individuals with social anxiety disorder are more likely to be distressed by fear of negative
 evaluation stemming from a panic attack than by the panic attacks themselves.
 Generalized anxiety disorder.
 Social worries are common in generalized anxiety disorder, but the
 focus is more on the nature of ongoing relationships rather than on fear of negative evaluation.
Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder, particularly children, may have excessive worries
 about the quality of their social performance, but these worries also pertain to nonsocial
 performance and when the individual is not being evaluated by others. In social anxiety disorder,
 the worries focus on social performance and others’ evaluation.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder may avoid social settings
 (including school refusal) because of concerns about being separated from attachment figures or,
 in children, about requiring the presence of a parent when it is not developmentally appropriate.
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder are usually comfortable in social settings when their
 attachment figure is present or when they are at home, whereas those with social anxiety disorder
 may be uncomfortable when social situations occur at home or in the presence of attachment
 figures.
 Specific phobias.
 Individuals with specific phobias may fear embarrassment or humiliation (e.g.,
 embarrassment about fainting when they have their blood drawn), but they do not generally fear
 negative evaluation in other social situations.
 Selective mutism.
 Individuals with selective mutism may fail to speak because of fear of negative
 evaluation, but they do not fear negative evaluation in social situations where no speaking is
 required (e.g., nonverbal play).
 Major depressive disorder.
 Individuals with major depressive disorder may be concerned about
 being negatively evaluated by others because they feel they are bad or not worthy of being liked.
 In contrast, individuals with social anxiety disorder are worried about being negatively evaluated
 because of certain social behaviors or physical symptoms.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are preoccupied with one
 or more perceived defects or flaws in their physical appearance that are not observable or appear
 slight to others; this preoccupation often causes social anxiety and avoidance. If their social fears
 and avoidance are caused only by their beliefs about their appearance, a separate diagnosis of
 social anxiety disorder is not warranted.
 Delusional disorder.
 Individuals with delusional disorder may have nonbizarre delusions and/or
 hallucinations related to the delusional theme that focus on being rejected by or offending others.
 Although extent of insight into beliefs about social situations may vary, many individuals with
 social anxiety disorder have good insight that their beliefs are out of proportion to the actual
 threat posed by the social situation.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Social anxiety and social communication deficits are hallmarks of
 autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with social anxiety disorder typically have adequate age
appropriate social relationships and social communication capacity, although they may appear to
 have impairment in these areas when first interacting with unfamiliar peers or adults.
 Personality disorders.
 Given its frequent onset in childhood and its persistence into and through
 adulthood, social anxiety disorder may resemble a personality disorder. The most apparent
 overlap is with avoidant personality disorder. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder have
 a broader avoidance pattern and higher rates of impairment than those individuals with social
 anxiety disorder. Moreover, individuals with avoidant personality disorder have a strong and
 pervasively negative self-concept, a view of rejection as equating to a global evaluation of the
 self as being of little worth, and a sense of not fitting in
Other mental disorders.
 Other medical conditions.
 Oppositional defiant disorder.
 F41.0
 235
 socially that dates from early childhood. Nonetheless, social anxiety disorder is typically more
 comorbid with avoidant personality disorder than with any other personality disorder, and
 avoidant personality disorder is more comorbid with social anxiety disorder than with any other
 anxiety disorder.
 Social fears and discomfort can occur as part of schizophrenia, but other
 evidence for psychotic symptoms is usually present. In individuals with an eating disorder, it is
 important to determine that fear of negative evaluation about eating disorder symptoms or
 behaviors (e.g., purging and vomiting) is not the sole source of social anxiety before applying a
 diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Similarly, obsessive-compulsive disorder may be associated
 with social anxiety, but the additional diagnosis of social anxiety disorder is used only when
 social fears and avoidance are independent of the foci of the obsessions and compulsions.
 Medical conditions may produce symptoms that may be embarrassing
 (e.g., trembling in Parkinson’s disease). When the fear of negative evaluation due to other
 medical conditions is judged to be excessive, a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be
 considered.
 Refusal to speak because of opposition to authority figures should be
 differentiated from failure to speak because of fear of negative evaluation.
 Comorbidity
 Social anxiety disorder is often comorbid with other anxiety disorders, major depressive
 disorder, and substance use disorders, and the onset of social anxiety disorder generally precedes
 that of the other disorders, except for specific phobia and separation anxiety disorder. Chronic
 social isolation in the course of social anxiety disorder may result in major depressive disorder.
 Comorbidity with depression is high also in older adults. Substances may be used as self
medication for social fears, but the symptoms of substance intoxication or withdrawal, such as
 trembling, may also be a source of (further) social fear. Social anxiety disorder is frequently
 comorbid with body dysmorphic disorder, and generalized social anxiety disorder is often
 comorbid with avoidant personality disorder. In children, comorbidities with high-functioning
 autism spectrum disorder and selective mutism are common.