Specific Phobia
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Marked fear or anxiety about a specific object or situation (e.g., flying, heights,
 animals, receiving an injection, seeing blood).
 Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums,
 freezing, or clinging.
 B. The phobic object or situation almost always provokes immediate fear or anxiety.
 C. The phobic object or situation is actively avoided or endured with intense fear or
 anxiety.
 D. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific
 object or situation and to the sociocultural context.
 E. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or
 more.
 F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 G. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
 disorder, including fear, anxiety, and avoidance of situations associated with
 panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms (as in agoraphobia);
 objects or situations related to obsessions (as in obsessive-compulsive
 disorder); reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder);
 separation from home or attachment figures (as in separation anxiety disorder);
 or social situations (as in social anxiety disorder).
 Specify if:
 Code based on the phobic stimulus:
 F40.218 Animal (e.g., spiders, insects, dogs).
 F40.228 Natural environment (e.g., heights, storms, water).
 F40.23x Blood-injection-injury (e.g., needles, invasive medical procedures).
 225
 Coding note: Select specific ICD-10-CM code as follows: F40.230 fear of
 blood; F40.231 fear of injections and transfusions; F40.232 fear of other
medical care; or F40.233 fear of injury.
 F40.248 Situational (e.g., airplanes, elevators, enclosed places).
 F40.298 Other (e.g., situations that may lead to choking or vomiting; in children,
 e.g., loud sounds or costumed characters).
 Coding note: When more than one phobic stimulus is present, code all ICD-10-CM
 codes that apply (e.g., for fear of snakes and flying, F40.218 specific phobia, animal,
 and F40.248 specific phobia, situational).
 Specifiers
 It is common for individuals to have multiple specific phobias. The average individual with
 specific phobia fears three objects or situations, and approximately 75% of individuals with
 specific phobia fear more than one situation or object. In such cases, multiple specific phobia
 diagnoses, each with its own diagnostic code reflecting the phobic stimulus, would need to be
 given. For example, if an individual fears thunderstorms and flying, then two diagnoses would be
 given: specific phobia, natural environment, and specific phobia, situational.
 Diagnostic Features
 A key feature of this disorder is that the fear or anxiety is circumscribed to the presence of a
 particular situation or object (Criterion A), which may be termed the phobic stimulus. The
 categories of feared situations or objects are provided as specifiers. Many individuals fear objects
 or situations from more than one category, or phobic stimulus. For the diagnosis of specific
 phobia, the response must differ from normal, transient fears that commonly occur in the
 population. To meet the criteria for a diagnosis, the fear or anxiety must be intense or severe (i.e.,
 “marked”) (Criterion A). The amount of fear experienced may vary with proximity to the feared
 object or situation and may occur in anticipation of or in the actual presence of the object or
 situation. Also, the fear or anxiety may take the form of a full or limited symptom panic attack
 (i.e., expected panic attack). Another characteristic of specific phobias is that fear or anxiety is
 evoked nearly every time the individual comes into contact with the phobic stimulus (Criterion
 B). Thus, an individual who becomes anxious only occasionally upon being confronted with the
 situation or object (e.g., becomes anxious when flying only on one out of every five airplane
 flights) would not be diagnosed with specific phobia. However, the degree of fear or anxiety
 expressed may vary (from anticipatory anxiety to a full panic attack) across different occasions
 of encountering the phobic object or situation because of various contextual factors such as the
 presence of others, duration of exposure, and other threatening elements such as turbulence on a
 flight for individuals who fear flying. Fear and anxiety are often expressed differently between
 children and adults. Also, the fear or anxiety occurs as soon as the phobic object or situation is
 encountered (i.e., immediately rather than being delayed).
 The individual actively avoids the situation, or if he or she either is unable or decides not to
 avoid it, the situation or object evokes intense fear or anxiety (Criterion C). Active avoidance
 means the individual intentionally behaves in ways that are designed to prevent or minimize
 contact with phobic objects or situations (e.g., takes tunnels instead of bridges on daily commute
 to work for fear of heights; avoids entering a dark room for fear of spiders; avoids accepting a
 job in a locale where a phobic stimulus is more common). Avoidance behaviors are often
obvious (e.g., an individual who fears blood refusing to go to the doctor) but are sometimes less
 obvious (e.g., an individual who fears snakes refusing to look at pictures that resemble the form
 or shape of snakes). Many individuals with specific phobias have suffered over many years and
 have changed their living circumstances in
 226
 ways designed to avoid the phobic object or situation as much as possible (e.g., an individual
 diagnosed with specific phobia, animal, who moves to reside in an area devoid of the particular
 feared animal). Therefore, they no longer experience fear or anxiety in their daily life. In such
 instances, avoidance behaviors or ongoing refusal to engage in activities that would involve
 exposure to the phobic object or situation (e.g., repeated refusal to accept offers for work-related
 travel because of fear of flying) may be helpful in confirming the diagnosis in the absence of
 overt anxiety or panic.
 The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger that the object or situation poses,
 or more intense than is deemed necessary (Criterion D). Although individuals with specific
 phobia often recognize their reactions as disproportionate, they tend to overestimate the danger
 in their feared situations, and thus the judgment of being out of proportion is made by the
 clinician. The individual’s sociocultural context should also be considered. For example, fears of
 the dark may be reasonable in a context of ongoing violence, and the degree of fear of insects
 considered to be disproportionate would be higher in settings where insects are consumed in the
 diet. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or more
 (Criterion E), which helps distinguish the disorder from transient fears that are common in the
 population, particularly among children. The specific phobia must cause clinically significant
 distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning in order for
 the disorder to be diagnosed (Criterion F).
 Associated Features
 Individuals with specific phobia typically experience an increase in physiological arousal in
 anticipation of or during exposure to a phobic object or situation. However, the physiological
 response to the feared situation or object varies. Whereas individuals with situational, natural
 environment, and animal specific phobias are likely to show sympathetic nervous system arousal,
 individuals with blood-injection-injury specific phobia often demonstrate a vasovagal fainting or
 near-fainting response that is marked by initial brief acceleration of heart rate and elevation of
 blood pressure followed by a deceleration of heart rate and a drop in blood pressure.
 Additionally, specific phobia is most consistently associated with abnormal activity in the
 amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, thalamus, and insula in response to the phobic
 object/situation.
 Prevalence
 In the United States, the 12-month community prevalence estimate for specific phobia is
 approximately 8%–12%. Prevalence rates in European countries are largely similar to those in
 the United States (e.g., about 6%), but rates are generally lower in Asian, African, and Latin
 American countries (2%–4%). Prevalence estimates in children average approximately 5%
across various countries, with a range of 3%–9%, and are approximately 16% in adolescents ages
 13–17 years in the United States. Prevalence estimates are lower in older individuals (about 3%
5%), possibly reflecting diminishing severity to subclinical levels. Women are more frequently
 affected than men across subtypes, at a rate of approximately 2:1.
 Development and Course
 Specific phobia sometimes develops following a traumatic event (e.g., being attacked by an
 animal or stuck in an elevator), observation of others going through a traumatic event (e.g.,
 watching someone drown), an unexpected panic attack in the to be feared situation (e.g., an
 unexpected panic attack while on the subway), or informational transmission (e.g., extensive
 media coverage of a plane crash). However, many individuals with specific phobia are unable to
 recall the specific reason for the onset of their phobias. Specific phobia usually develops in early
 childhood, with the majority of cases developing prior to age 10 years. Median age at onset is
 between 7 and 11 years, with the mean at about 10 years.
 227
 Situational specific phobias tend to have a later age at onset than natural environment, animal, or
 blood-injection-injury specific phobias. Specific phobias that develop in childhood and
 adolescence are likely to wax and wane during that period. However, phobias that do persist into
 adulthood are unlikely to remit for the majority of individuals.
 When specific phobia is being diagnosed in children, two issues should be considered. First,
 young children may express their fear and anxiety by crying, tantrums, freezing, or clinging.
 Second, young children typically are not able to understand the concept of avoidance. Therefore,
 the clinician should assemble additional information from parents, teachers, or others who know
 the child well. Excessive fears are quite common in young children but are usually transitory and
 only mildly impairing and thus considered developmentally appropriate. In such cases a
 diagnosis of specific phobia would not be made. When the diagnosis of specific phobia is being
 considered in a child, it is important to assess the degree of impairment and the duration of the
 fear, anxiety, or avoidance, and whether it is typical for the child’s particular developmental
 stage.
 Although the prevalence of specific phobia is lower in older populations, it remains one of
 the more commonly experienced disorders in late life. Several issues should be considered when
 diagnosing specific phobia in older populations. First, older individuals may be more likely to
 endorse natural environment specific phobias, as well as phobias of falling. Second, specific
 phobia (like all anxiety disorders) tends to co-occur with medical concerns in older individuals,
 including coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and Parkinson’s
 disease. Third, older individuals may be more likely to attribute the symptoms of anxiety to
 medical conditions. Fourth, older individuals may be more likely to manifest anxiety in an
 atypical manner (e.g., involving symptoms of both anxiety and depression) and thus be more
 likely to warrant a diagnosis of unspecified anxiety disorder. Additionally, the presence of
 specific phobia in older adults is associated with decreased quality of life and may serve as a risk
 factor for major neurocognitive disorder.
 Although most specific phobias develop in childhood and adolescence, it is possible for a
specific phobia to develop at any age, often as the result of experiences that are traumatic. For
 example, phobias of choking almost always follow a near-choking event at any age.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Environmental.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Temperamental risk factors for specific phobia, such as negative affectivity
 (neuroticism) or behavioral inhibition, are risk factors for other anxiety disorders as well.
 Environmental risk factors for specific phobias, such as parental
 overprotectiveness, parental loss and separation, and physical and sexual abuse, tend to predict
 other anxiety disorders as well. As noted earlier, negative or traumatic encounters with the feared
 object or situation sometimes (but not always) precede the development of specific phobia.
 There may be a genetic susceptibility to a certain category of specific
 phobia (e.g., an individual with a first-degree relative with a specific phobia of animals is
 significantly more likely to have the same type of specific phobia than any other category of
 phobia). Twin studies have examined the heritability of individual subtypes of fears and phobias,
 suggesting that animal phobia has approximately 32% heritability, blood-injury-injection phobia
 has 33%, and situational phobia has 25%.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In the United States, individuals of Asian and Latinx descent report lower prevalence of specific
 phobia than non-Latinx Whites and African Americans. The prevalence of specific phobia
 subtypes varies cross-nationally.
 228
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Animal, natural environment, and situational specific phobias are predominantly experienced by
 women, whereas blood-injection-injury phobia is experienced nearly equally among women and
 men. The average age at onset of specific phobia during childhood does not differ between
 girls/women and boys/men.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Specific phobia is associated with both suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts based on national
 U.S. survey data. Specific phobia is also associated with a transition from ideation to attempt.
 For individuals in the community ages 14–24 years, a large prospective study over a 10-year
 period in Germany found that 30% of first suicide attempts could be attributable to specific
 phobia.
 Functional Consequences of Specific Phobia
 Individuals with specific phobia show similar patterns of impairment in psychosocial functioning
 and decreased quality of life as individuals with other anxiety disorders and alcohol and
 substance use disorders, including impairments in occupational and interpersonal functioning. In
 older adults, impairment may be seen in caregiving duties and volunteer activities. Also, fear of
falling in older adults can lead to reduced mobility and reduced physical and social functioning,
 and may lead to receiving formal or informal home support. The distress and impairment caused
 by specific phobias tend to increase with the number of feared objects and situations. Thus, an
 individual who fears four objects or situations is likely to have more impairment in his or her
 occupational and social roles and a lower quality of life than an individual who fears only one
 object or situation. Individuals with blood-injection-injury specific phobia are often reluctant to
 obtain medical care even when a medical concern is present. Additionally, fear of vomiting and
 choking may substantially reduce dietary intake.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Agoraphobia.
 Situational specific phobia may resemble agoraphobia in its clinical presentation,
 given the overlap in feared situations (e.g., flying, enclosed places, elevators). If an individual
 fears only one of the agoraphobic situations, then specific phobia, situational, may be diagnosed.
 If two or more agoraphobic situations are feared, a diagnosis of agoraphobia is likely warranted.
 For example, an individual who fears airplanes and elevators (which overlap with the “public
 transportation” agoraphobic situation) but does not fear other agoraphobic situations would be
 diagnosed with specific phobia, situational, whereas an individual who fears airplanes, elevators,
 and crowds (which overlap with two agoraphobic situations, “using public transportation” and
 “standing in line or being in a crowd”) would be diagnosed with agoraphobia. Criterion B of
 agoraphobia (the situations are feared or avoided “because of thoughts that escape might be
 difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic-like symptoms or other
 incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms”) can also be useful in differentiating agoraphobia
 from specific phobia. If the situations are feared for reasons other than not being able to escape
 or get help, such as fear of being harmed directly by the object or situation (e.g., fear of the plane
 crashing, fear of the animal biting), a specific phobia diagnosis may be more appropriate.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 If the situations are feared because of negative evaluation, social anxiety
 disorder should be diagnosed instead of specific phobia.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 If the situations are feared because of separation from a primary
 caregiver or attachment figure, separation anxiety disorder should be diagnosed instead of
 specific phobia.
 229
 Panic disorder.
 Individuals with specific phobia may experience panic attacks when confronted
 with their feared situation or object. A diagnosis of specific phobia would be given if the panic
 attacks only occurred in response to the specific object or situation, whereas a diagnosis of panic
 disorder would be given if the individual also experienced panic attacks that were unexpected
 (i.e., not in response to the specific phobia object or situation).
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 If an individual’s primary fear or anxiety is of an object or
 situation as a result of obsessions (e.g., fear of blood due to obsessive thoughts about
 contamination from blood-borne pathogens [i.e., HIV]; fear of driving due to obsessive images
 of harming others), and if other diagnostic criteria for obsessive-compulsive disorder are met,
 then obsessive-compulsive disorder should be diagnosed.
Trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
 Eating disorders.
 Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 F40.10
 If the phobia develops following a traumatic event,
 posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) should be considered as a diagnosis. However, traumatic
 events can precede the onset of PTSD and specific phobia. In this case, a diagnosis of specific
 phobia would be assigned only if all of the criteria for PTSD are not met.
 A diagnosis of specific phobia is not given if the avoidance behavior is
 exclusively limited to avoidance of food and food-related cues, in which case a diagnosis of
 anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa should be considered.
 When the fear and avoidance are attributable
 to delusional thinking (as in schizophrenia or other schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
 disorders), a diagnosis of specific phobia is not warranted.
 Comorbidity
 Specific phobia is rarely seen in medical-clinical settings in the absence of other
 psychopathology and is more frequently seen in nonmedical mental health settings. Specific
 phobia is frequently associated with a range of other disorders. Because of early onset, specific
 phobia is typically the temporally primary disorder. Individuals with specific phobia are at
 increased risk for the development of other disorders, including other anxiety disorders,
 depressive and bipolar disorders, substance-related disorders, somatic symptom and related
 disorders, and personality disorders (particularly dependent personality disorder).