Agoraphobia
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Marked fear or anxiety about two (or more) of the following five situations:
 1. Using public transportation (e.g., automobiles, buses, trains, ships, planes).
 2. Being in open spaces (e.g., parking lots, marketplaces, bridges).
 3. Being in enclosed places (e.g., shops, theaters, cinemas).
 4. Standing in line or being in a crowd.
 5. Being outside of the home alone.
 B. The individual fears or avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape
 might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic
like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fear of
 falling in the elderly; fear of incontinence).
 C. The agoraphobic situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
 D. The agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, require the presence of a
 companion, or are endured with intense fear or anxiety.
 E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the
 agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context.
 F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or
more.
 G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 H. If another medical condition (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, Parkinson’s
 disease) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly excessive.
 I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of
 another mental disorder—for example, the symptoms are not confined to specific
 phobia, situational type; do not involve only social situations (as in social anxiety
 disorder); and are not related exclusively to obsessions (as in obsessive
compulsive disorder), perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance (as in
 body dysmorphic disorder), reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic
 stress disorder), or fear of separation (as in separation anxiety disorder).
 Note: Agoraphobia is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. If an
 individual’s presentation meets criteria for panic disorder and agoraphobia, both
 diagnoses should be assigned.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of agoraphobia is marked fear or anxiety triggered by the real or anticipated
 exposure to a wide range of situations (Criterion A). The diagnosis requires endorsement of
 symptoms occurring in at least two of the following five situations: 1) using public
 transportation, such as automobiles, buses, trains, ships, or planes; 2) being in open spaces, such
 as parking lots, marketplaces, or bridges; 3) being in enclosed spaces, such as shops, theaters, or
 cinemas; 4) standing in line or being in a crowd; or 5) being outside of the home alone. The
 examples for each situation are not exhaustive; other situations may be feared. When
 experiencing fear and anxiety cued by such situations, individuals typically experience thoughts
 that something terrible might happen (Criterion B). Individuals frequently believe that escape
 from such situations might be difficult (e.g., “can’t get out of here”) or that help might be
 unavailable (e.g., “there is nobody to help me”) when panic-like symptoms or other
 incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms occur. “Panic-like symptoms” refer to any of the 13
 symptoms included in the criteria for panic attack, such as dizziness, faintness, and fear of dying.
 “Other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms” include
 247
 symptoms such as vomiting and inflammatory bowel symptoms, as well as, in older adults, a fear
 of falling or, in children, a sense of disorientation and getting lost.
 The amount of fear experienced may vary with proximity to the feared situation and may
 occur in anticipation of or in the actual presence of the agoraphobic situation. Also, the fear or
 anxiety may take the form of a full- or limited-symptom panic attack (i.e., an expected panic
 attack). Fear or anxiety is evoked nearly every time the individual comes into contact with the
 feared situation (Criterion C). Thus, an individual who becomes anxious only occasionally in an
 agoraphobic situation (e.g., becomes anxious when standing in line on only one out of every five
 occasions) would not be diagnosed with agoraphobia. The individual actively avoids the
situation, requires the presence of a companion, or, if he or she either is unable or decides not to
 avoid it, the situation evokes intense fear or anxiety (Criterion D). Active avoidance means the
 individual is currently behaving in ways that are intentionally designed to prevent or minimize
 contact with agoraphobic situations. Avoidance can be behavioral (e.g., changing daily routines,
 choosing a job nearby to avoid using public transportation, arranging for food delivery to avoid
 entering shops and supermarkets) as well as cognitive (e.g., using distraction to get through
 agoraphobic situations) in nature. The avoidance can become so severe that the individual is
 completely homebound. Often, an individual is better able to confront a feared situation when
 accompanied by a companion, such as a partner, friend, or health professional. Also, the
 individual may employ safety behaviors (e.g., sitting near exits when taking public transportation
 or at the movies) to better endure such situations.
 The fear, anxiety, or avoidance must be out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the
 agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context (Criterion E). Differentiating
 disproportionate, clinically significant agoraphobic fears from reasonable fears (e.g., not wanting
 to leave the house during a bad storm) or from situations that are deemed dangerous (e.g.,
 walking in a parking lot or using public transportation in a high-crime area) is important for a
 number of reasons. First, what constitutes avoidance may be difficult to judge across cultures and
 sociocultural contexts (e.g., it is socioculturally appropriate for orthodox Muslim women in
 certain parts of the world to avoid leaving the house alone, and thus such avoidance would not be
 considered indicative of agoraphobia). Second, older adults are likely to overattribute their fears
 to age-related constraints and are less likely to judge their fears as being out of proportion to the
 actual risk. Third, individuals with agoraphobia are likely to overestimate danger in relation to
 panic-like or other bodily symptoms. Agoraphobia should be diagnosed only if the fear, anxiety,
 or avoidance is persistent (Criterion F) and if it causes clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion G). The
 duration of “typically lasting for 6 months or more” is meant to exclude individuals with short
lived, transient problems.
 Associated Features
 In its most severe forms, agoraphobia can cause individuals to become completely homebound,
 unable to leave their home and dependent on others for services or assistance to provide even for
 basic needs. Demoralization and depressive symptoms, as well as abuse of alcohol and sedative
 medication as inappropriate self-medication strategies, are common.
 Prevalence
 Every year approximately 1%–1.7% of adolescents and adults worldwide have symptoms that
 meet diagnostic criteria for agoraphobia. Women are twice as likely as men to experience
 agoraphobia. Agoraphobia may occur in childhood, but incidence peaks in late adolescence and
 early adulthood. Studies have shown the 12-month prevalence in individuals living in the United
 States who are older than 65 years is 0.4% and 0.5% among individuals in Europe and North
 America older than 55 years. Approximately 0.2%–0.8% of
 248
the adult population in various countries has a past 12-month diagnosis of agoraphobia without
 panic disorder.
 Development and Course
 The percentage of individuals with agoraphobia reporting panic attacks or panic disorder
 preceding the onset of agoraphobia ranges from 30% in community samples to more than 50% in
 clinical samples.
 In two-thirds of all cases of agoraphobia, initial onset is before age 35 years, with 21 years
 the mean age at onset, although age at onset of agoraphobia without preceding panic attacks or
 panic disorder is 25–29 years. First onset in childhood is rare. There is a substantial incidence
 risk in adolescence and early adulthood, with indications for a second high incidence risk phase
 after age 40 years. Approximately 10% of older adults with agoraphobia reported their first
 episode of agoraphobia occurring after age 65.
 The course of agoraphobia is typically persistent and chronic. Complete remission is rare
 (10%), unless the agoraphobia is treated. Individuals with comorbid panic disorder and
 agoraphobia are more likely to experience recurrence of symptoms after a period of remission if
 they had an earlier age at onset (< 20 years old). With more severe agoraphobia, rates of full
 remission decrease, whereas rates of relapse and chronicity increase. Approximately 36% of
 individuals with agoraphobia who achieve remission eventually experience relapse. A range of
 other disorders, in particular other anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, substance use
 disorders, and personality disorders, may complicate the course of agoraphobia. The long-term
 course and outcome of agoraphobia are associated with substantially elevated risk of secondary
 major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder, and substance use disorders.
 The clinical features of agoraphobia are relatively consistent across the life span, although
 the type of agoraphobic situations triggering fear, anxiety, or avoidance, as well as the type of
 cognitions, may vary. For example, in children, being outside of the home alone is the most
 frequent situation feared, whereas in older adults, being in shops, standing in line, and being in
 open spaces are most often feared. Also, cognitions often pertain to becoming lost (in children),
 to experiencing panic-like symptoms (in adults), to falling (in older adults).
 The apparent low prevalence of agoraphobia in children could reflect difficulties in symptom
 reporting, and thus assessments in young children may require solicitation of information from
 multiple sources, including parents or teachers. Adolescents, particularly boys, may be less
 willing than adults to openly discuss agoraphobic fears and avoidance; however, agoraphobia
 can occur before adulthood and should be assessed in children and adolescents. In older adults,
 comorbid somatic symptom disorder, having medical complications, and motor disturbances
 (e.g., a sense of falling) are frequently mentioned by individuals as the reason for their fear and
 avoidance. In these instances, care is to be taken in evaluating whether the fear and avoidance are
 out of proportion to the real danger involved.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity (neuroticism), anxiety sensitivity, and
 trait anxiety are closely associated with agoraphobia but are relevant to most anxiety disorders
 (specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder). Anxiety
 sensitivity (the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are harmful) is also characteristic
of individuals with agoraphobia.
 Environmental.
 Negative events in childhood (e.g., separation, death of parent) and other stressful
 events, such as being attacked or mugged, are associated with the onset of agoraphobia.
 Furthermore, individuals with agoraphobia describe the family climate and child-rearing
 behavior as being characterized by reduced warmth and increased overprotection.
 249
 Genetic and physiological.
 Heritability for agoraphobia is 61%. Of the various phobias,
 agoraphobia has the strongest and most specific association with the genetic factor that
 represents proneness to phobias. Family history of anxiety disorders is associated with an earlier
 age at onset of agoraphobia (< 27 years old), and family history of panic disorder in particular is
 associated with agoraphobia.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Women have different patterns of comorbid disorders than men. Consistent with gender
 differences in the prevalence of mental disorders, men have higher rates of comorbid substance
 use disorders.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Approximately 15% of individuals with agoraphobia report suicidal thoughts or behavior. For
 individuals with panic disorder, symptoms of agoraphobia may be a risk factor for suicidal
 thoughts.
 Functional Consequences of Agoraphobia
 Like most other anxiety disorders, agoraphobia is associated with considerable impairment and
 disability in terms of role functioning, work productivity, and disability days. Agoraphobia
 severity is a strong determinant of the degree of disability, irrespective of the presence of
 comorbid panic disorder, panic attacks, and other comorbid conditions. Individuals with
 agoraphobia can be completely homebound or unable to work. Individuals with panic disorder
 with agoraphobia who have an early course of onset (< age 20 years) are less likely to be
 married.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Specific phobia, situational type.
 Differentiating agoraphobia from situational specific phobia can
 be challenging in some cases, because these conditions share several symptom characteristics
 and criteria. Specific phobia, situational type, should be diagnosed versus agoraphobia if the fear,
 anxiety, or avoidance is limited to one of the agoraphobic situations. Requiring fears from two or
 more of the agoraphobic situations is a robust means for differentiating agoraphobia from
 specific phobias, particularly the situational subtype. Additional differentiating features include
 the content of the individual’s cognitions. Thus, if the situation is feared for reasons other than
 panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fears of being
 directly harmed by the situation itself, such as fear of the plane crashing for individuals who fear
Separation anxiety disorder.
 flying), then a diagnosis of specific phobia may be more appropriate.
 Separation anxiety disorder can be best differentiated from
 agoraphobia by examining the individual’s cognitions. In separation anxiety disorder, the
 thoughts are about detachment from significant others and the home environment (i.e., parents or
 other attachment figures), whereas in agoraphobia the focus is on panic-like symptoms or other
 incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms in the feared situations.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 Panic disorder.
 Agoraphobia should be differentiated from social anxiety disorder based
 primarily on the situational clusters that trigger fear, anxiety, or avoidance and the individual’s
 cognitions. In social anxiety disorder, the focus is on fear of being negatively evaluated.
 When criteria for panic disorder are met, agoraphobia should not be diagnosed if
 the avoidance behaviors associated with the panic attacks do not extend to avoidance of two or
 more agoraphobic situations.
 250
 Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic
 stress disorder (PTSD) can be differentiated from agoraphobia by examining whether the fear,
 anxiety, or avoidance is related only to situations that remind the individual of a traumatic event.
 If the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is restricted to trauma reminders, and if the avoidance behavior
 does not extend to two or more agoraphobic situations, then a diagnosis of agoraphobia is not
 warranted.
 Major depressive disorder.
 In major depressive disorder, the individual may avoid leaving home
 because of apathy, loss of energy, low self-esteem, and anhedonia. If the avoidance is unrelated
 to fears of panic-like or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms, then agoraphobia should
 not be diagnosed.
 Avoidance related to other medical conditions.
 Individuals with certain medical conditions may
 avoid situations because of realistic concerns about being incapacitated (e.g., fainting in an
 individual with transient ischemic attacks) or being embarrassed (e.g., diarrhea in an individual
 with Crohn’s disease). The diagnosis of agoraphobia should be given only when the fear or
 avoidance is clearly in excess of that usually associated with these medical conditions.
 Comorbidity
 About 90% of individuals with agoraphobia also have other mental disorders. The most frequent
 additional diagnoses are other anxiety disorders (e.g., specific phobias, panic disorder, social
 anxiety disorder), depressive disorders (major depressive disorder), PTSD, and alcohol use
 disorder. Whereas other anxiety disorders (e.g., separation anxiety disorder, specific phobias,
 panic disorder) frequently precede onset of agoraphobia, depressive disorders and substance use
 disorders typically occur secondary to agoraphobia. In some individuals, a substance use disorder
 precedes agoraphobia. Individuals with comorbid agoraphobia and major depressive disorder
 tend to have a more treatment-resistant course of agoraphobia relative to individuals with
 agoraphobia alone.
