Substance/Medication-Induced Anxiety Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Panic attacks or anxiety is predominant in the clinical picture.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by an anxiety disorder that is not
 substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent anxiety
 disorder could include the following:
 The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
 the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
 evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non
substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent
 non-substance/medication-related episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
 attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 anxiety disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
 the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a
 substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced anxiety disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and
 the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance
induced anxiety disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced
 anxiety disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with
 the substance-induced anxiety disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the
 clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance]
 use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If
 there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the
 substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should record
 only the substance-induced anxiety disorder.
 256
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.180 F10.280 F10.980
 Caffeine NA NA F15.980
 Cannabis F12.180 F12.280 F12.980
 Phencyclidine F16.180 F16.280 F16.980
 Other hallucinogen F16.180 F16.280 F16.980
 Inhalant F18.180 F18.280 F18.980
 Opioid F11.188 F11.288 F11.988
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.180 F13.280 F13.980
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.180 F15.280 F15.980
 Cocaine F14.180 F14.280 F14.980
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.180 F19.280 F19.980
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
 medication.
 Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder begins with the specific
 substance (e.g., cocaine, salbutamol) that is presumed to be causing the anxiety symptoms. The
 diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug
 class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not
 fit into any of the classes (e.g., salbutamol), the code for “other (or unknown) substance” should
 be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
 class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be used.
 To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
 first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder” (incorporating the name
 of the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e.,
 onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use). For
 example, in the case of anxiety symptoms occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe
 lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.280 severe lorazepam use disorder with lorazepam
induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid
 severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced anxiety disorder occurs
 without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
 257
 heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.980
 psilocybin-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
 substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of anxiety symptoms, each
 should be listed separately (e.g., F15.280 severe methylphenidate use disorder with
 methylphenidate-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.980 salbutamol
induced anxiety disorder, with onset after medication use).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder are prominent
 symptoms of panic or anxiety (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure). The panic or anxiety symptoms must
 have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or
 withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or medications must be capable of producing
 the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder due to a prescribed
 treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the
 individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with
the medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the panic or anxiety symptoms will usually
 improve or remit within days to several weeks to a month (depending on the half-life of the
 substance/medication and the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication
induced anxiety disorder should not be given if the onset of the panic or anxiety symptoms
 precedes the substance/medication intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a
 substantial period of time (i.e., usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication
 or withdrawal. If the panic or anxiety symptoms persist for substantial periods of time, other
 causes for the symptoms should be considered.
 The substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder diagnosis should be made instead of a
 diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in
 Criterion A are predominant in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant
 independent clinical attention.
 Associated Features
 Panic or anxiety can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
 substances: alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, phencyclidine, other hallucinogens, inhalants, stimulants
 (including cocaine), and other (or unknown) substances. Panic or anxiety can occur in
 association with withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids;
 sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown)
 substances. Some medications that evoke anxiety symptoms include anesthetics and analgesics,
 sympathomimetics or other bronchodilators, anticholinergics, insulin, thyroid preparations, oral
 contraceptives, antihistamines, antiparkinsonian medications, corticosteroids, antihypertensive
 and cardiovascular medications, anticonvulsants, lithium carbonate, antipsychotic medications,
 and antidepressant medications. Heavy metals and toxins (e.g., organophosphate insecticide,
 nerve gases, carbon monoxide, CO2, volatile substances such as gasoline and paint) may also
 cause panic or anxiety symptoms.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is not clear. General
 population data suggest that it may be rare, with a 12-month prevalence in the United States of
 approximately 0.002%. However, in clinical populations, the prevalence is likely to be higher.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory assessments (e.g., urine toxicology) may be useful to measure substance intoxication
 as part of an assessment for substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 258
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Anxiety symptoms commonly occur in substance
 intoxication and substance withdrawal. The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or
 substance-specific withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A
 diagnosis of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder either with onset during intoxication
or with onset during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication
 or substance withdrawal when the panic or anxiety symptoms are predominant in the clinical
 picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention. For example, panic or anxiety
 symptoms are characteristic of alcohol withdrawal.
 Independent anxiety disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance/medication).
 disorder 
co-occurring 
An independent anxiety
 with substance/medication use is distinguished from a
 substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder by the fact that even though a
 substance/medication may be taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related
 to the anxiety symptoms, the anxiety symptoms are observed at times other than during
 substance/medication use (i.e., preceding the onset of substance/medication use or persisting for
 a substantial period of time after substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, or medication
 use) and would warrant the diagnosis of an independent anxiety disorder.
 Delirium.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 If panic or anxiety symptoms occur exclusively during the course of delirium, they are
 considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed separately.
 If the panic or anxiety symptoms are attributed to
 the physiological consequences of another medical condition (i.e., rather than to the medication
 taken for the medical condition), anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be
 diagnosed. The history often provides the basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the
 treatment for the other medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
 be needed to determine whether the medication is the causative agent (in which case the
 symptoms may be better explained by substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder). If the
 disturbance is attributable to both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses
 (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced
 anxiety disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the
 panic or anxiety symptoms are attributable to a substance/medication or to another medical
 condition or are primary (i.e., not attributable to either a substance or another medical condition),
 a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified anxiety disorder would be indicated.