Differential Diagnosis
 Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms.
 Paranoid personality disorder can be distinguished
 from delusional disorder, persecutory type; schizophrenia; and a bipolar or depressive disorder
 with psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent
 psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). For an additional diagnosis of paranoid
 personality disorder to be given, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset
 of psychotic symptoms and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When
 an individual has another persistent mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by
 paranoid personality disorder, paranoid personality disorder should also be recorded, followed by
 “premorbid” in parentheses.
 Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Paranoid personality disorder must be
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 Paranoid personality disorder must be distinguished from symptoms that
 may develop in association with persistent substance use.
 Paranoid traits associated with physical handicaps.
 The disorder must also be distinguished from
 paranoid traits associated with the development of physical handicaps (e.g., a hearing
 impairment).
 741
 Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 paranoid personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to paranoid personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Paranoid
 personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder share the traits of suspiciousness,
 interpersonal aloofness, and paranoid ideation, but schizotypal personality disorder also includes
 symptoms such as magical thinking, unusual perceptual experiences, and odd thinking and
 speech. Individuals with behaviors that meet criteria for schizoid personality disorder are often
 perceived as strange, eccentric, cold, and aloof, but they do not usually have prominent paranoid
 ideation. The tendency of individuals with paranoid personality disorder to react to minor stimuli
 with anger is also seen in borderline and histrionic personality disorders. However, these
 disorders are not necessarily associated with pervasive suspiciousness, and borderline personality
 disorder exhibits higher levels of impulsivity and self-destructive behavior. People with avoidant
 personality disorder may also be reluctant to confide in others, but more from fear of being
 embarrassed or found inadequate than from fear of others’ malicious intent. Although antisocial
 behavior may be present in some individuals with paranoid personality disorder, it is not usually
 motivated by a desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder,
 but rather is more often attributable to a desire for revenge. Individuals with narcissistic
 personality disorder may occasionally display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation,
 but this derives primarily from fears of having their imperfections or flaws revealed.
F60.1
 Paranoid traits may be adaptive, particularly in threatening environments. Paranoid
 personality disorder should be diagnosed only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and
 persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress.

