Differential Diagnosis
 Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms.
 Schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished
 from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic
 features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic
 symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of schizoid
 personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset of
 psychotic symptoms and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an
 individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by schizoid
 personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder should also be recorded, followed by
 “premorbid” in parentheses.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 There may be great difficulty differentiating individuals with schizoid
 personality disorder from individuals with autism spectrum disorder, particularly with milder
 forms of either disorder, as both include a seeming indifference to companionship with others.
 However, autism spectrum disorder may be differentiated by stereotyped behaviors and interests.
 Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Schizoid personality disorder must be
Substance use disorders.
 Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 F21
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 744
 Schizoid personality disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms
 that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 schizoid personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to schizoid personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
 characteristics of social isolation and restricted affectivity are common to schizoid, schizotypal,
 and paranoid personality disorders, schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from
 schizotypal personality disorder by the lack of cognitive and perceptual distortions and from
 paranoid personality disorder by the lack of suspiciousness and paranoid ideation. The social
 isolation of schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from that of avoidant personality
 disorder, which is attributable to fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate and excessive
 anticipation of rejection. In contrast, people with schizoid personality disorder have a more
 pervasive detachment and limited desire for social intimacy. Individuals with obsessive
compulsive personality disorder may also show an apparent social detachment stemming from
 devotion to work and discomfort with emotions, but they do have an underlying capacity for
 intimacy.
 Individuals who are “loners” or quite introverted may display personality traits that might be
 considered schizoid, consistent with the broader conceptualization of schizoid personality
 disorder as a disorder defined by pathological introversion/detachment. Only when these traits
 are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress
 do they constitute schizoid personality disorder
