Differential Diagnosis
 Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms.
 Schizotypal 
personality 
disorder 
can 
be
 distinguished from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive disorder with
 psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent
 psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of
 schizotypal personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset
 of psychotic symptoms and persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an
 individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by
 schizotypal personality disorder, schizotypal personality disorder should also be recorded,
followed by “premorbid” in parentheses.
 Neurodevelopmental disorders.
 There may be great difficulty differentiating children with
 schizotypal personality disorder from the heterogeneous group of solitary, odd children whose
 behavior is characterized by marked social isolation, eccentricity, or peculiarities of language
 and whose diagnoses would probably include milder forms of autism spectrum disorder or
 language communication disorders. Communication disorders may be differentiated by the
 primacy and severity of the disorder in language and by the characteristic features of impaired
 language found in a specialized language assessment. Milder forms of autism spectrum disorder
 are differentiated by the even greater lack of social awareness and emotional reciprocity and
 stereotyped behaviors and interests.
 Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Schizotypal personality disorder must be
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 Schizotypal personality disorder must also be distinguished from
 symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 schizotypal personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to schizotypal personality disorder, all can be diagnosed.
 Although paranoid and schizoid personality disorders may also be characterized by social
 detachment and restricted affect, schizotypal personality disorder can be distinguished from these
 two diagnoses by the presence of cognitive or perceptual distortions and marked eccentricity or
 oddness. Close relationships are limited in both schizotypal personality disorder and avoidant
 personality disorder; however, in avoidant personality disorder an active desire for relationships
 is constrained by a fear of rejection, whereas in schizotypal personality disorder there is a lack of
 desire for relationships and persistent detachment. Individuals with narcissistic personality
 disorder may also display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation, but in narcissistic
 personality disorder these qualities derive primarily from fears of having imperfections or flaws
 revealed. Individuals with borderline personality disorder may also have transient, psychotic-like
 symptoms, but these are usually more closely related to affective shifts in response to stress (e.g.,
 intense anger, anxiety, disappointment) and are usually more dissociative (e.g., derealization,
 depersonalization). In contrast, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder are more likely
 to have enduring psychotic-like symptoms that may worsen under stress but are less likely to be
 invariably associated with pronounced affective symptoms. Although social isolation may occur
 in borderline personality disorder, it is usually secondary to repeated interpersonal failures due to
 angry outbursts and frequent mood shifts, rather than a result of a persistent lack of social
 contacts and desire for intimacy. Furthermore, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder
 do not usually demonstrate the impulsive or manipulative behaviors of the individual with
 748
 borderline personality disorder. However, there is a high rate of co-occurrence between the two
 disorders, so that making such distinctions is not always feasible. Schizotypal features during
F60.2
 adolescence may be reflective of transient emotional turmoil rather than an enduring personality
 disorder.