Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea Diagnostic Criteria A. Either (1) or (2): 1. Evidence by polysomnography of at least five obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep and either of the following sleep symptoms: a. Nocturnal breathing disturbances: snoring, snorting/gasping, or breathing pauses during sleep. b. Daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient opportunities to sleep that is not better explained by another mental disorder (including a sleep disorder) and is not attributable to another medical condition. 2. Evidence by polysomnography of 15 or more obstructive apneas and/or hypopneas per hour of sleep regardless of accompanying symptoms. Specify current severity: Mild: Apnea hypopnea index is less than 15. Moderate: Apnea hypopnea index is 15–30. Severe: Apnea hypopnea index is greater than 30. Specifiers Disease severity is measured by a count of the number of apneas plus hypopneas per hour of sleep (apnea hypopnea index) using polysomnography or other overnight monitoring. 430 Apnea refers to the total absence of airflow, and hypopnea refers to a reduction in airflow. Overall severity is also informed by levels of nocturnal desaturation and sleep fragmentation (measured by brain cortical arousal frequency and sleep stages) and degree of associated symptoms and daytime impairment. However, the exact number and thresholds may vary according to the specific measurement techniques used, and these numbers may change over time. Regardless of the apnea hypopnea index (count) per se, the disorder is considered to be more severe when apneas and hypopneas are accompanied by significant oxygen hemoglobin desaturation (e.g., when more than 10% of the sleep time is spent at desaturation levels of < 90%) or when sleep is severely fragmented as shown by an elevated arousal index (arousals per hour of sleep > 30) or reduced time in deep sleep (e.g., percentage stage N3 [slow-wave sleep] < 5%). Diagnostic Features Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is the most common breathing-related sleep disorder. It is characterized by repeated episodes of upper (pharyngeal) airway obstruction (apneas and hypopneas) during sleep. Each apnea or hypopnea represents a reduction in breathing of at least 10 seconds in duration in adults or two missed breaths in children and is typically associated with drops in oxygen saturation of ≥ 3% and/or an electroencephalographic arousal. Both sleep- related (nocturnal) and wake-time symptoms are common. The cardinal symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are snoring and daytime sleepiness. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea in adults is diagnosed on the basis of findings from a polysomnogram (or sleep testing performed outside of the sleep center, referred to as out of center sleep testing [OCST]) and symptoms. The diagnosis is based on symptoms of 1) nocturnal breathing disturbances (i.e., snoring, snorting/gasping, breathing pauses during sleep), or 2) daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient opportunities to sleep that are not better explained by another mental disorder and not attributable to another medical condition, along with 3) evidence by polysomnography (or OCST) of five or more obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A1). Diagnosis can be made in the absence of these symptoms if there is evidence by polysomnography (or limited OCST) of 15 or more obstructive apneas and/or hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A2). Criteria for a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea in children differ from those for a diagnosis in adults. An obstructive apnea hypopnea index of one or more events per hour or evidence of obstructive hypoventilation in association with snoring or polysomnographic evidence of airflow obstruction is used to define thresholds of abnormality in children. Polysomnographic findings in children may differ from those in adults in that children may demonstrate labored breathing; partial obstructive hypoventilation (sustained reductions of tidal volume due to upper airway flow limitations) with cyclical oxygen desaturations; hypercapnia; and paradoxical breathing. Most cases of obstructive sleep apnea remain undiagnosed. Therefore, specific attention to symptoms of disturbed sleep occurring in association with snoring or breathing pauses and physical findings that increase risk of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g., central obesity, crowded pharyngeal airway, elevated blood pressure) is important to reduce the chance of failure to diagnose this treatable condition. Associated Features Because of the frequency of nocturnal awakenings that occur with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, individuals may report symptoms of insomnia. Other common, though nonspecific, symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are heartburn, nocturia, morning headaches, dry mouth, erectile dysfunction, and reduced libido. Individuals may complain of difficulty breathing while lying supine or sleeping. Hypertension may occur in more than 60% of individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. 431 Arterial blood gas measurements while the individual is awake are usually normal, but some individuals may demonstrate waking hypoxemia or hypercapnia. This pattern should alert the clinician to the possibility of coexisting lung disease or hypoventilation. Imaging procedures may reveal narrowing of the upper airway. Cardiac testing may show evidence of impaired ventricular function. Arrhythmias such as sinus pauses, frequent atrial and ventricular ectopic beats, or atrial fibrillation may be present during sleep. Individuals with severe nocturnal oxygen desaturation may also have elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit values. Prevalence Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is a very common disorder. Prevalence may be particularly high among men as compared with women, ranging from 2:1 to 4:1; older adults; and certain racial and ethnic groups. Prevalence varies cross-nationally, partly because of differences in assessment methods. Because the disorder is strongly associated with obesity, the rise in obesity rates has resulted in an increased prevalence of this disorder. In the United States, 13% of men and 6% of women have polysomnographic evidence of 15 or more obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep, and 14% of men and 5% of women have more than 5 obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep, plus symptoms of daytime sleepiness. Gender differences decline in older age, possibly because of increased prevalence in females after menopause; postmenopausal females are 2.6–3.5 times more likely to have obstructive sleep apnea compared with premenopausal females. In the general community, prevalence rates in the United States of undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be very high in elderly individuals. Obstructive sleep apnea also occurs in children, with an estimated prevalence of 1%–4%; there is no gender difference among prepubertal children. Children who are obese have higher rates. Prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea appears to be higher among African Americans than among U.S. non-Latinx Whites. An increased prevalence among African Americans, American Indians, and Hispanics may be related to higher rates of obesity, which can be associated with differential exposure to social determinants of health, including food insecurity, food deserts, and limited access to safe and affordable places for physical activity. Development and Course The age distribution of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has several peaks. The first occurs in children ages 3–8 years when the nasopharynx may be compromised by a relatively large mass of tonsillar tissue compared with the size of the upper airway. With growth of the airway and regression of lymphoid tissue during later childhood, there is reduction in prevalence. However, with the increase of obesity in adolescents, a second peak in prevalence occurs in that age group. Finally, as obesity prevalence continues to increase in midlife and women enter menopause, rates of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea further increase. The course in older age is unclear; prevalence of the disorder may plateau after age 65 years, but in some individuals, severity may worsen with aging. Polysomnographic results must be interpreted in light of other clinical data. Significant clinical symptoms of insomnia or hypersomnia should be investigated regardless of the individual’s age. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea usually has an insidious onset, gradual progression, and persistent course. Typically, the loud snoring has been present for many years, often since childhood, but an increase in its severity may lead the individual to seek evaluation. Weight gain may precipitate an increase in symptoms. Although obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can occur at any age, it most commonly manifests among individuals ages 40–60 years. Over 4–5 years, the average apnea hypopnea index increases in adults and older individuals by approximately two apneas or hypopneas per hour. The apnea hypopnea index is increased and incident obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is greater among 432 individuals who are older, who are male, or who have a higher baseline body mass index (BMI) or increase their BMI over time. Spontaneous resolution of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has been reported with weight loss, particularly after bariatric surgery. In children, seasonal variation in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has been observed, as has improvement with overall growth. In young children, the signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be more subtle than in adults, making diagnosis more difficult to establish. Polysomnography is useful in confirming diagnosis. Evidence of fragmentation of sleep on the polysomnogram may not be as apparent as in studies of older individuals, possibly because of the high homeostatic drive in young individuals. Symptoms such as snoring are usually parent-reported and thus have reduced sensitivity. Agitated arousals and unusual sleep postures, such as sleeping on the hands and knees, may occur. Nocturnal enuresis also may occur and should raise the suspicion of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea if it recurs in a child who was previously dry at night. Children may also manifest excessive daytime sleepiness, although this is not as common or pronounced as in adults. Daytime mouth breathing, difficulty in swallowing, and poor speech articulation are Genetic and physiological. also common features in children. Children younger than 5 years more often present with nighttime symptoms, such as observed apneas or labored breathing, than with behavioral symptoms (i.e., the nighttime symptoms are more noticeable and more often bring the child to clinical attention). In children older than 5 years, daytime symptoms such as sleepiness and behavioral problems (e.g., impulsivity and hyperactivity), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, learning difficulties, and morning headaches are more often the focus of concern. Children with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may present with delayed growth, failure to thrive, and developmental delays. Although obesity is a less important risk factor in young children, it nevertheless contributes to the occurrence of obstructive sleep apnea. Risk and Prognostic Factors The major risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are obesity and male sex. Others include maxillary-mandibular retrognathia or micrognathia, positive family history of sleep apnea, genetic syndromes that reduce upper airway patency (e.g., Down syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome), adenotonsillar hypertrophy (especially in young children), menopause (in females), and various endocrine syndromes (e.g., acromegaly). Compared with premenopausal females, males are at increased risk for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, possibly reflecting the influences of sex hormones on ventilatory control and body fat distribution, as well as gender differences in airway structure. Medications for mental disorders and medical conditions that tend to induce somnolence may worsen the course of apnea symptoms if these medications are not managed carefully. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has a strong genetic basis, as evidenced by the significant familial aggregation of the apnea hypopnea index. The prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is approximately twice as high among the first-degree relatives of probands with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea as compared with members of control families. One-third of the variance in the apnea hypopnea index is explained by shared familial factors. Although genetic markers with diagnostic or prognostic value are not yet available for use, eliciting a family history of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should increase the clinical suspicion for the disorder. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues There is a potential for sleepiness and fatigue to be reported differently across cultures. In some groups, snoring may be considered a sign of normal health and thus may not trigger concerns, leading to underdiagnosis. 433 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Menopause, pregnancy, and polycystic ovarian syndrome increase the risk of obstructive sleep apnea in females. The transition from premenopause to postmenopause is associated with increased severity of obstructive sleep apnea. Women may more commonly report fatigue, lack of energy, or insomnia rather than sleepiness and may underreport snoring. Diagnostic Markers Primary snoring and other sleep disorders. Central sleep apnea. Polysomnography provides quantitative data on frequency of sleep-related respiratory disturbances and associated changes in oxygen saturation and sleep continuity. Validated sleep measures (e.g., multiple sleep latency test, maintenance of wakefulness test) may identify sleepiness. Functional Consequences of Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea More than 50% of individuals with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea report symptoms of daytime sleepiness. A twofold increased risk of occupational accidents has been reported in association with symptoms of snoring and sleepiness. Motor vehicle crashes also have been reported to be as much as sevenfold higher among individuals with elevated apnea hypopnea index values. Clinicians should be cognizant of state government requirements for reporting this disorder, especially in relationship to commercial drivers. Reduced scores on measures of health-related quality of life are common in individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Although the greatest functional impact is observed in the “vitality” domain, severe obstructive sleep apnea negatively affects general health and physical and social functioning as well. Differential Diagnosis Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be differentiated from individuals with primary snoring (i.e., otherwise asymptomatic individuals who snore and do not have abnormalities on overnight polysomnography). Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may additionally report nocturnal gasping and choking, which can be confused with the presence of asthma or gastroesophageal reflux. The presence of sleepiness or other daytime symptoms not explained by other etiologies suggests the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, but this differentiation requires polysomnography. Definitive differential diagnosis between hypersomnolence disorder, central sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also requires polysomnographic studies. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be differentiated from other causes of sleepiness, such as narcolepsy, hypersomnolence disorder, insufficient sleep, and circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can be differentiated from narcolepsy by the absence of cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, and sleep paralysis and by the presence of loud snoring, gasping during sleep, or observed apneas in sleep. Daytime sleep episodes in narcolepsy are characteristically shorter, more refreshing, and more often associated with dreaming. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea shows characteristic apneas and hypopneas and oxygen desaturation during nocturnal polysomnographic studies. Narcolepsy results in multiple sleep-onset rapid eye movement (REM) periods during the MSLT. Narcolepsy, like obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, may be associated with obesity, and some individuals have concurrent narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. A diagnosis of narcolepsy does not exclude the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as the two conditions may co-occur. 434 Central sleep apnea can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea by the presence of repetitive apneas or hypopneas due to reduction or absence of respiratory effort on Insomnia disorder. Panic attacks. Nocturnal asthma. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Substance/medication-induced insomnia or hypersomnia. polysomnogram recording. Snoring may be present, although it may be less prominent than observed in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or absent altogether. Individuals with central sleep apnea often exhibit fragmented sleep and may also complain of daytime sleepiness. Central sleep apnea is seen most commonly in individuals with congestive heart failure (Cheyne-Stokes breathing) or neurological disease, or those using opioid medications. For individuals complaining of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep or early-morning awakenings, insomnia disorder can be differentiated from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea by the absence of snoring and the absence of the history, signs, and symptoms characteristic of the latter disorder. However, insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may coexist, and if so, both disorders may need to be addressed concurrently to improve sleep. Nocturnal panic attacks may include symptoms of gasping or choking during sleep that may be difficult to distinguish clinically from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. However, the lower frequency of episodes, intense autonomic arousal, and lack of excessive sleepiness differentiate nocturnal panic attacks from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Polysomnography (or OCST) in individuals with nocturnal panic attacks does not reveal the typical pattern of apneas or oxygen desaturation characteristic of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea do not provide a history of daytime panic attacks. Nocturnal asthma can often cause sudden awakening from sleep with symptoms of gasping or choking that are indistinguishable from dyspneic episodes resulting from obstructive sleep apnea. However, a history of asthma is generally present and polysomnography (or OCST) does not find evidence of apneas, hypopneas, or oxygen desaturation indicative of obstructive apnea. Nevertheless, nocturnal asthma and obstructive sleep apnea can coexist, and this can make it difficult to determine the relative contributions of each condition. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children may include symptoms of inattention, academic impairment, hyperactivity, and internalizing behaviors, all of which may also be symptoms of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. The presence of other symptoms and signs of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g., labored breathing or snoring during sleep and adenotonsillar hypertrophy) would suggest the presence of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder may commonly co-occur, and there may be causal links between them; therefore, risk factors such as enlarged tonsils, obesity, or a family history of sleep apnea may help alert the clinician to their co-occurrence. Substance use and substance withdrawal (including medications) can produce insomnia or hypersomnia. A careful history is usually sufficient to identify the relevant substance/medication, and follow-up shows improvement of the sleep disturbance after discontinuation of the substance/medication. In other cases, the use of a substance/medication (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opiates) has been shown to exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. An individual with symptoms and signs consistent with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should receive that diagnosis, even in the presence of concurrent substance use that is exacerbating the condition. Comorbidity Systemic hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, stroke, diabetes, and increased mortality are consistently associated with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Risk 435 estimates vary from 30% to as much as 300% for moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Obstructive sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease are strongly related, and treatment of obstructive sleep apnea reduces morbidity and mortality of cardiovascular disease. Ethnic and racialized groups that have not received adequate health care may be at higher risk for undetected cardiovascular risk factors associated with obstructive sleep apnea. Evidence of pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure (e.g., cor pulmonale, ankle edema, hepatic congestion) is rare in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and when present indicates either very severe disease or associated hypoventilation or cardiopulmonary comorbidities. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may occur with increased frequency in association with a number of medical or neurological conditions (e.g., cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson’s disease). Physical findings reflect the co- occurrence of these conditions. As many as one-third of individuals referred for evaluation of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea report symptoms of depression, with as many of 10% having depression scores consistent with moderate to severe depression. Severity of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as measured by the apnea hypopnea index, has been found to be correlated with severity of symptoms of depression. This association may be stronger in men than in women. Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), differentiates 11 subtypes of “sleep-related breathing disorders,” including central sleep apneas (CSAs) (e.g., primary CSA, CSA due to a medical/neurological condition, CSA due to a substance or medication), obstructive sleep apnea (adult and pediatric), and sleep-related hypoventilation disorders.