Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders Diagnostic Criteria A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of sleep disruption that is primarily due to an alteration of the circadian system or to a misalignment between the endogenous circadian rhythm and the sleep-wake schedule required by an individual’s physical environment or social or professional schedule. B. The sleep disruption leads to excessive sleepiness or insomnia, or both. C. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning. Specify whether: G47.21 Delayed sleep phase type: A pattern of delayed sleep onset and awakening times, with an inability to fall asleep and awaken at a desired or conventionally acceptable earlier time. Specify if: Familial: A family history of delayed sleep phase is present. Specify if: Overlapping with non-24-hour sleep-wake type: Delayed sleep phase type may overlap with another circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, non-24-hour sleep-wake type. G47.22 Advanced sleep phase type: A pattern of advanced sleep onset and awakening times, with an inability to remain awake or asleep until the desired or conventionally acceptable later sleep or wake times. Specify if: Familial: A family history of advanced sleep phase is present. G47.23 Irregular sleep-wake type: A temporally disorganized sleep-wake pattern, such that the timing of sleep and wake periods is variable throughout the 24-hour period. 444 G47.24 Non-24-hour sleep-wake type: A pattern of sleep-wake cycles that is not synchronized to the 24-hour environment, with a consistent daily drift (usually to later and later times) of sleep onset and wake times. G47.26 Shift work type: Insomnia during the major sleep period and/or excessive sleepiness (including inadvertent sleep) during the major awake period associated with a shift work schedule (i.e., requiring unconventional work hours). G47.20 Unspecified type Specify if: Episodic: Symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months. Persistent: Symptoms last 3 months or longer. Recurrent: Two or more episodes occur within the space of 1 year.