Central Sleep Apnea Diagnostic Criteria A. Evidence by polysomnography of five or more central apneas per hour of sleep. B. The disorder is not better explained by another current sleep disorder. Specify whether: G47.31 Idiopathic central sleep apnea: Characterized by repeated episodes of apneas and hypopneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort but without evidence of airway obstruction. R06.3 Cheyne-Stokes breathing: A pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas at a frequency of at least five events per hour, accompanied by frequent arousal. G47.37 Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use: The pathogenesis of this subtype is attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm generators in the medulla as well as the differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapnic respiratory drive. Coding note (for G47.37 code only): When an opioid use disorder is present, first code the opioid use disorder: F11.10 mild opioid use disorder or F11.20 moderate or severe opioid use disorder; then code G47.37 central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use. When an opioid use disorder is not present (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), code only G47.37 central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use. 436 Specify current severity: Severity of central sleep apnea is graded according to the frequency of the breathing disturbances as well as the extent of associated oxygen desaturation and sleep fragmentation that occur as a consequence of repetitive respiratory disturbances. Subtypes There are several subtypes of central sleep apnea. Idiopathic central sleep apnea (alternatively termed primary central sleep apnea) and central sleep apnea with Cheyne-Stokes breathing are characterized by increased gain of the ventilatory control system, also referred to as high loop gain, which leads to instability in ventilation and PaCO2 levels. This instability is termed periodic breathing and can be recognized by hyperventilation alternating with hypoventilation. Individuals with these disorders typically have pCO2 levels while awake that are slightly hypocapnic or normocapnic. Central sleep apnea may also manifest during initiation of treatment of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (termed treatment-emergent central sleep apnea) or may occur in association with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome. The occurrence of central sleep apnea in association with obstructive sleep apnea is also considered to be due to high loop gain. In contrast, the pathogenesis of central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use has been attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm generators in the medulla as well as to its differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapnic respiratory drive. These individuals may have elevated pCO2 levels while awake. Individuals receiving chronic methadone maintenance therapy have been noted to have increased somnolence and depression, although the role of opioid-induced breathing disorders in causing these problems has not been studied. Similarly, central apnea due to a medical disorder without Cheyne-Stokes breathing is a result of a pathological process that affects brain-stem ventilatory control centers. Specifiers An increase in the central apnea index (i.e., number of central apneas per hour of sleep) reflects an increase in severity of central sleep apnea. Sleep continuity and quality may be markedly impaired with reductions in restorative stages of non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (i.e., decreased slow-wave sleep [stage N3]). In individuals with severe Cheyne-Stokes breathing, the pattern can also be observed during resting wakefulness, a finding that is thought to be a prognostic marker for increased mortality. Diagnostic Features Central sleep apnea disorders are characterized by repeated episodes of apneas and hypopneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort. These are disorders of ventilatory control in which respiratory events occur in a periodic or intermittent pattern. Idiopathic central sleep apnea is characterized by sleepiness, insomnia, and awakenings due to dyspnea in association with five or more central apneas per hour of sleep. Individuals with heart failure, stroke, or renal failure who have central sleep apnea typically have a breathing pattern called Cheyne-Stokes breathing, which is characterized by a pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour. Events are often associated with arousal, but arousals are not required for the diagnosis. Central sleep apnea observed at high altitude occurs after ascent to high altitude, generally at least 2,500 meters above sea level. Central and obstructive sleep apneas may coexist; a diagnosis of central sleep apnea hypopnea requires that central events be > 50% of the total number of respiratory events. Alterations in neuromuscular control of breathing can occur in association with medications or substances, which can cause or exacerbate impairments of respiratory rhythm and ventilation. Individuals taking medications with these effects may have a sleep-related breathing disorder that could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms such 437 as sleepiness, confusion, and depression. Specifically, chronic use of long-acting opioid medications is often associated with impairment of respiratory control leading to central sleep apnea. Associated Features Individuals with central sleep apnea hypopneas may present with sleepiness or insomnia. They may have complaints of sleep fragmentation, including awakening with dyspnea. Some individuals are asymptomatic. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can coexist with Cheyne- Stokes breathing, and thus snoring and abruptly terminated obstructive events may be observed during sleep. Physical findings seen in individuals with a Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern relate to its risk factors. Findings consistent with heart failure, such as jugular venous distension, S3 heart sound, lung crackles, and lower-extremity edema, may be present. Prevalence The prevalence of idiopathic central sleep apnea is unknown but thought to be rare. The prevalence of Cheyne-Stokes breathing is high in individuals with depressed cardiac ventricular ejection fraction. In individuals with an ejection fraction of < 45%, the prevalence has been reported to range from 15% to 44%. The gender ratio for prevalence in North America, Europe, Genetic and physiological. and Australia is even more highly skewed toward men than for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Prevalence increases with age, and most individuals with the disorder are older than 60 years. Cheyne-Stokes breathing occurs in approximately 20% of individuals with acute stroke as assessed in Barcelona and Toronto. Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use occurs in approximately 24% of individuals taking opioids chronically for nonmalignant pain and similarly in individuals receiving methadone maintenance therapy as seen in several high-income countries. Higher opioid doses are associated with greater severity, especially at morphine- equivalent daily dosages > 200 mg. In children assessed in France and Canada, the prevalence ranges from 4% to 6%. Development and Course Polysomnography parameters for diagnosing central sleep apnea are different for children than for adults and comprise any of the following: 1) cessation of airflow and respiratory effort for more than 20 seconds, two breath cycles that are associated with an arousal from sleep, or > 3% oxygen desaturation; or 2) two breath cycles that are associated with bradycardia. The onset of Cheyne-Stokes breathing appears tied to the development of heart failure. The Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern is associated with oscillations in heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen desaturation, and elevated sympathetic nervous system activity that can promote progression of heart failure. The clinical significance of Cheyne-Stokes breathing in the setting of stroke is not known, but Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be a transient finding that resolves with time after acute stroke. Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use has been documented with chronic use (i.e., several months). Risk and Prognostic Factors Cheyne-Stokes breathing is frequently present in individuals with heart failure. The coexistence of atrial fibrillation further increases risk, as do older age and male sex. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is also seen in association with acute stroke and possibly renal failure. The underlying ventilatory instability in the setting of heart failure has been attributed to increased ventilatory chemosensitivity and hyperventilation due to pulmonary vascular congestion and circulatory delay. Central sleep apnea is seen in individuals taking long-acting opioids. In children, central sleep apnea can be found in 438 individuals with congenital abnormalities, particularly Arnold-Chiari malformation, or comorbid medical conditions such as gastroesophageal reflux. Rarely, central sleep apnea resulting from a congenital condition may not manifest until adulthood (e.g., Arnold-Chiari malformation and congenital central hypoventilation). Diagnostic Markers Polysomnography is used to characterize the breathing characteristics of each breathing-related sleep disorder subtype. Central sleep apneas are recorded when periods of breathing cessation for longer than 10 seconds occur. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is characterized by a pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas Other breathing-related sleep disorders and sleep disorders. occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour with the number of central apneas and hypopneas > 50% of the total number of apneas and hypopneas. The cycle length of Cheyne- Stokes breathing (or time from end of one central apnea to the end of the next apnea) is about 60 seconds. Functional Consequences of Central Sleep Apnea Idiopathic central sleep apnea has been reported to cause symptoms of disrupted sleep, including insomnia and sleepiness. Cheyne-Stokes breathing with comorbid heart failure has been associated with excessive sleepiness, fatigue, and insomnia, although many individuals may be asymptomatic. Coexistence of heart failure and Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be associated with increased cardiac arrhythmias and increased mortality or cardiac transplantation. Individuals with central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use may present with symptoms of sleepiness or insomnia. Differential Diagnosis Idiopathic central sleep apnea must be distinguished from other breathing-related sleep disorders, other sleep disorders, and medical conditions and mental disorders that cause sleep fragmentation, sleepiness, and fatigue. This is achieved using polysomnography. Central sleep apnea can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea by the presence of at least five central apneas per hour of sleep. These conditions may co-occur, but central sleep apnea is considered to predominate when central respiratory events are > 50% of the total number of respiratory events. Cheyne-Stokes breathing can be distinguished from other mental disorders, including other sleep disorders, and other medical conditions that cause sleep fragmentation, sleepiness, and fatigue based on the presence of a predisposing condition (e.g., heart failure or stroke) and signs and polysomnographic evidence of the characteristic breathing pattern. Polysomnographic respiratory findings can help distinguish Cheyne-Stokes breathing from insomnia due to other medical conditions. For example, central sleep apnea due to high-altitude periodic breathing has a pattern that resembles Cheyne-Stokes breathing but has a shorter cycle time, occurs only at high altitude, and is not associated with heart failure. Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use can be differentiated from other types of breathing-related sleep disorders based on the use of long-acting opioid medications in conjunction with polysomnographic evidence of central apneas and periodic or ataxic breathing. It can be distinguished from insomnia due to drug or substance use based on polysomnographic evidence of central sleep apnea. Comorbidity Central sleep apnea disorders are frequently present in users of long-acting opioids, such as methadone. Individuals taking these medications have a breathing-related sleep disorder that could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms such as sleepiness, 439 confusion, and depression. While the individual is asleep, breathing patterns such as central apneas, periodic apneas, and ataxic breathing may be observed. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may coexist with central sleep apnea, and features consistent with this condition can also be present (see “Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea” earlier in this chapter). Cheyne-Stokes breathing is more commonly observed in association with conditions that include heart failure, stroke, and renal failure and is seen more frequently in individuals with atrial fibrillation. Individuals with Cheyne-Stokes breathing are more likely to be older, to be male, and to have lower weight than individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), includes eight subtypes of central sleep apnea (central sleep apnea with Cheyne-Stokes breathing, central apnea due to a medical disorder without Cheyne-Stokes breathing, central sleep apnea due to high- altitude periodic breathing, central sleep apnea due to a medication or substance, primary central sleep apnea, primary central sleep apnea of infancy, primary central sleep apnea of prematurity, and treatment-emergent central sleep apnea). As in DSM-5, most of these diagnoses require a frequency of 5 or more central events per hour of sleep. In addition, ICSD-3 criteria also require the presence of signs or symptoms (e.g., complaints of insomnia or daytime sleepiness). Central events must constitute at least 50% of the total number of apneas and hypopneas. Primary central sleep apnea of infancy and primary central sleep apnea of prematurity have their own distinct criteria sets that differ from adult forms of central sleep apnea.