Sleep-Related Hypoventilation Diagnostic Criteria A. Polysomnograpy demonstrates episodes of decreased respiration associated with elevated CO2 levels. (Note: In the absence of objective measurement of CO2, persistent low levels of hemoglobin oxygen saturation unassociated with apneic/hypopneic events may indicate hypoventilation.) B. The disturbance is not better explained by another current sleep disorder. Specify whether: G47.34 Idiopathic hypoventilation: This subtype is not attributable to any readily identified condition. G47.35 Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation: This subtype is a rare congenital disorder in which the individual typically presents in the perinatal period with shallow breathing, or cyanosis and apnea during sleep. G47.36 Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation: This subtype occurs as a consequence of a medical condition, such as a pulmonary disorder (e.g., interstitial lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) or a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular dystrophies, postpolio syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury, kyphoscoliosis), or medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). It also occurs with obesity (obesity hypoventilation disorder), where it reflects a combination of increased work of breathing due to reduced chest wall compliance and ventilation-perfusion mismatch and variably reduced ventilatory drive. Such individuals usually are characterized by body mass index of greater than 30 and hypercapnia during wakefulness (with a pCO2 of greater than 45), without other evidence of hypoventilation. 440 Specify current severity: Severity is graded according to the degree of hypoxemia and hypercarbia present during sleep and evidence of end organ impairment due to these abnormalities (e.g., right-sided heart failure). The presence of blood gas abnormalities during wakefulness is an indicator of greater severity. Subtypes Subtypes of sleep-related hypoventilation include the following: Idiopathic hypoventilation, also referred to as idiopathic central alveolar hypoventilation, is characterized by reduction of tidal volume and elevated CO2 during sleep, in the absence of any identifiable comorbidity that would account for the hypoventilation. Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is a rare disorder associated with mutation of the gene PHOX2B. It typically manifests at birth. Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation is due to one of numerous potential comorbidities, including pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]), chest wall abnormalities (e.g., kyphoscoliosis), neuromuscular disease (e.g., amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), and obesity (referred to as obesity hypoventilation), as well as use of medications or substances, especially opioids. Diagnostic Features Sleep-related hypoventilation can occur independently or, more frequently, comorbid with medical or neurological disorders, medication use, or substance use disorder. Although symptoms are not mandatory to make this diagnosis, individuals often report excessive daytime sleepiness, frequent arousals and awakenings during sleep, morning headaches, and insomnia complaints. Associated Features Individuals with sleep-related hypoventilation can present with sleep-related complaints of insomnia or sleepiness. Episodes of orthopnea can occur in individuals with diaphragm weakness. Headaches upon awakening may be present. During sleep, episodes of shallow breathing may be observed, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or central sleep apnea may coexist. Consequences of ventilatory insufficiency, including pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale (right heart failure), polycythemia, and neurocognitive dysfunction, can be present. Environmental. Genetic and physiological. With progression of ventilatory insufficiency, blood gas abnormalities extend into wakefulness. Features of a medical condition causing sleep-related hypoventilation can also be present. Episodes of hypoventilation may be associated with frequent arousals or bradytachycardia. Individuals may complain of excessive sleepiness and insomnia or morning headaches or may present with findings of neurocognitive dysfunction or depression. Hypoventilation may not be present during wakefulness. Prevalence Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation in adults is very uncommon. The prevalence of congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is unknown, but the disorder is rare. Comorbid sleep- related hypoventilation (i.e., hypoventilation comorbid with other conditions, such as COPD, neuromuscular disorders, or obesity) is more common. The prevalence of comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation due to obesity in the general population is estimated to be approximately 0.14%–0.6% based on national obesity rates and prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea across several countries. Increasing rates of obesity are associated with increasing prevalence of comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation 441 due to obesity. In individuals referred to a sleep clinic who have a body mass index > 35 kg/m2, prevalence may be as high as 42%. Development and Course Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is thought to be a slowly progressive disorder of respiratory impairment. When sleep-related hypoventilation disorder occurs comorbidly with other disorders (e.g., COPD, neuromuscular disorders, obesity), disease severity reflects the severity of the underlying condition, and the disorder progresses as the condition worsens. Complications such as pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, cardiac dysrhythmias, polycythemia, neurocognitive dysfunction, and worsening respiratory failure can develop with increasing severity of blood gas abnormalities. Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation usually manifests at birth with shallow, erratic, or absent breathing. This disorder can also manifest during infancy, childhood, and adulthood because of variable penetrance of the PHOX2B mutation. Risk and Prognostic Factors Ventilatory drive can be reduced in individuals who are using central nervous system depressants, including benzodiazepines, opiates, and alcohol. Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is associated with reduced ventilatory drive due to a blunted chemoresponsiveness to CO2 (reduced respiratory drive; i.e., “won’t breathe”), reflecting underlying neurological deficits in centers governing the control of ventilation. More commonly, sleep-related hypoventilation is comorbid with another medical condition, such as a pulmonary disorder, a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder, or hypothyroidism, or with use of medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). In these conditions, the hypoventilation may be a consequence of increased work of breathing and/or impairment of respiratory muscle function (i.e., “can’t breathe”) or reduced respiratory drive. Neuromuscular disorders influence breathing through impairment of respiratory motor innervation or respiratory muscle function. They include conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spinal cord injury, diaphragmatic paralysis, myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, toxic or metabolic myopathies, postpolio syndrome, and Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome. Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is a genetic disorder attributable to mutations of PHOX2B, a gene that is crucial for the development of the embryonic autonomic nervous system and neural crest derivatives. Children with congenital central alveolar hypoventilation show blunted ventilatory responses to hypercapnia, especially in non–rapid eye movement sleep. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Gender distributions for sleep-related hypoventilation occurring in association with comorbid conditions reflect the gender distributions of the comorbid conditions. For example, COPD is more frequently present in men and with increasing age. Contrary to previous data, obesity hypoventilation is now thought to occur equally between genders, and in some studies there may be even a slightly greater prevalence in women. Diagnostic Markers Sleep-related hypoventilation is diagnosed using polysomnography, which demonstrates sleep- related hypoxemia and hypercapnia that is not better explained by another breathing-related sleep disorder. The documentation of 1) increased arterial pCO2 levels to > 55 mmHg during sleep or 2) a ≥ 10-mmHg increase in pCO2 levels (to a level that also exceeds 442 50 mmHg) during sleep in comparison to awake supine values, in each case exceeding 10 minutes’ duration, is the gold standard for diagnosis. However, obtaining arterial blood gas determinations during sleep is impractical, and non-invasive measures of pCO2 have not been adequately validated during sleep and are not widely used during polysomnography in adults. Prolonged and sustained decreases in oxygen saturation (oxygen saturation of < 90% for more than 5 minutes with a nadir of at least 85%, or oxygen saturation of < 90% for at least 30% of sleep time) in the absence of evidence of upper airway obstruction are often used as an indication of sleep-related hypoventilation; however, this finding is not specific, as there are other potential causes of hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease. Children with congenital central alveolar hypoventilation are more likely to have disorders of the autonomic nervous system, Hirschsprung’s disease, neural crest tumors, and characteristic box-shaped face (i.e., the face is short relative to its width). Functional Consequences of Sleep-Related Hypoventilation The consequences of sleep-related hypoventilation are related to the effects of chronic exposure to hypercapnia and hypoxemia. These blood gas derangements cause vasoconstriction of the Other medical conditions affecting ventilation. Other breathing-related sleep disorders. pulmonary vasculature leading to pulmonary hypertension, which, if severe, can result in right- sided heart failure (cor pulmonale). Hypoxemia can lead to dysfunction of organs such as the brain, blood, and heart, leading to outcomes such as cognitive dysfunction, polycythemia, and cardiac arrhythmias. Hypercapnia can depress ventilatory drive, leading to progressive respiratory failure. Differential Diagnosis In adults, the idiopathic variety of sleep-related hypoventilation is very uncommon and is determined by excluding the presence of lung diseases, skeletal malformations, neuromuscular disorders, and other medical and neurological disorders or medications that affect ventilation. Sleep-related hypoventilation must be distinguished from other causes of sleep-related hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease. Sleep-related hypoventilation can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea based on clinical features and findings on polysomnography. Sleep-related hypoventilation typically shows more sustained periods of oxygen desaturation rather than the periodic episodes seen in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea also show a pattern of discrete episodes of repeated airflow reductions that can be absent in sleep-related hypoventilation. However, both obstructive and central apneas and hypopneas can occur in association with sleep-related hypoventilation. In obesity hypoventilation, most individuals will have comorbid obstructive sleep apnea. Comorbidity Sleep-related hypoventilation often occurs in association with a pulmonary disorder (e.g., interstitial lung disease, COPD), with a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular dystrophies, post-polio syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury, kyphoscoliosis), with obesity, or, most relevant to the clinician, with medication use (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation often occurs in association with autonomic dysfunction and may occur in association with Hirschsprung’s disease. COPD, a disorder of lower airway obstruction usually associated with cigarette smoking, can result in sleep-related hypoventilation and hypoxemia. The presence of coexisting obstructive sleep apnea 443 hypopnea is thought to exacerbate hypoxemia and hypercapnia during sleep and wakefulness. The relationship between congenital central alveolar hypoventilation and idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is unclear; in some individuals, idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation may represent cases of late-onset congenital central alveolar hypoventilation. Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), recognizes six subtypes of sleep hypoventilation disorders. Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome and idiopathic hypoventilation (idiopathic central alveolar hypoventilation in the ICSD-3) are identically classified in DSM-5 and ICSD-3. However, the ICSD-3 subtypes obesity hypoventilation syndrome, sleep-related hypoventilation due to a medication or substance, and sleep-related hypoventilation due to a medical disorder are subsumed under comorbid sleep- related hypoventilation in DSM-5. The subtype late-onset central hypoventilation with hypothalamic dysfunction is not in DSM-5. The DSM-5 approach to classification reflects the frequent co-occurrence of disorders that lead to hypoventilation and hypoxemia. In contrast, the classification used in ICSD-3 reflects evidence that there are distinct sleep-related pathogenetic processes leading to hypoventilation.