Differential Diagnosis
 The diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder should be made whenever Criteria A, B,
 and C are met. A diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder should not be assumed
 because of a particular genetic or medical condition. A genetic syndrome linked to intellectual
 developmental disorder should be noted as a concurrent diagnosis with the intellectual
developmental disorder.
 Major and mild neurocognitive disorders.
 Intellectual developmental disorder is categorized as a
 neurodevelopmental disorder and is distinct from the neurocognitive disorders, which are
 characterized by a loss of cognitive functioning. Major neurocognitive disorder may co-occur
 with intellectual developmental disorder (e.g., an individual with Down syndrome who develops
 Alzheimer’s disease, or an individual with intellectual developmental disorder who loses further
 cognitive capacity following a head injury). In such cases, the diagnoses of intellectual
 developmental disorder and neurocognitive disorder may both be given. Moreover, when there is
 stabilization of cognitive functioning following traumatic or nontraumatic brain injury with onset
 in the developmental period (childhood and adolescence), and there is no continuing cognitive
 decline, both neurocognitive disorder and intellectual developmental disorder diagnoses can be
 used if diagnostic criteria are met for intellectual developmental disorder.
 Communication disorders and specific learning disorder.
 These neurodevelopmental disorders are
 specific to the communication and learning domains and do not show deficits in intellectual and
 adaptive behavior. They may co-occur with intellectual developmental disorder. Both diagnoses
 are made if full criteria are met for intellectual developmental disorder and a communication
 disorder or specific learning disorder.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Intellectual developmental disorder is common among individuals with
 autism spectrum disorder. Assessment of intellectual ability may be complicated by social
communication and behavior deficits inherent to autism spectrum disorder, which may interfere
 with understanding and complying with test procedures. Appropriate assessment of intellectual
 functioning in autism spectrum disorder is essential, with reassessment across the developmental
 period, because IQ scores in autism spectrum disorder may be unstable, particularly in early
 childhood.
