Differential Diagnosis
 Primary snoring and other sleep disorders.
 Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must
 be differentiated from individuals with primary snoring (i.e., otherwise asymptomatic individuals
 who snore and do not have abnormalities on overnight polysomnography). Individuals with
 obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may additionally report nocturnal gasping and choking, which
 can be confused with the presence of asthma or gastroesophageal reflux. The presence of
 sleepiness or other daytime symptoms not explained by other etiologies suggests the diagnosis of
 obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, but this differentiation requires polysomnography. Definitive
 differential diagnosis between hypersomnolence disorder, central sleep apnea, sleep-related
 hypoventilation, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also requires polysomnographic studies.
 Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be differentiated from other causes of sleepiness,
 such as narcolepsy, hypersomnolence disorder, insufficient sleep, and circadian rhythm sleep
 disorders. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can be differentiated from narcolepsy by the
 absence of cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, and sleep paralysis and by the presence of
 loud snoring, gasping during sleep, or observed apneas in sleep. Daytime sleep episodes in
 narcolepsy are characteristically shorter, more refreshing, and more often associated with
 dreaming. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea shows characteristic apneas and hypopneas and
 oxygen desaturation during nocturnal polysomnographic studies. Narcolepsy results in multiple
 sleep-onset rapid eye movement (REM) periods during the MSLT. Narcolepsy, like obstructive
 sleep apnea hypopnea, may be associated with obesity, and some individuals have concurrent
 narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. A diagnosis of narcolepsy does not exclude
 the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as the two conditions may co-occur.
 434
 Central sleep apnea.
 Central sleep apnea can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea by the
 presence of repetitive apneas or hypopneas due to reduction or absence of respiratory effort on
polysomnogram recording. Snoring may be present, although it may be less prominent than
 observed in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or absent altogether. Individuals with central sleep
 apnea often exhibit fragmented sleep and may also complain of daytime sleepiness. Central sleep
 apnea is seen most commonly in individuals with congestive heart failure (Cheyne-Stokes
 breathing) or neurological disease, or those using opioid medications.
 Insomnia disorder.
 For individuals complaining of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep or
 early-morning awakenings, insomnia disorder can be differentiated from obstructive sleep apnea
 hypopnea by the absence of snoring and the absence of the history, signs, and symptoms
 characteristic of the latter disorder. However, insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
 may coexist, and if so, both disorders may need to be addressed concurrently to improve sleep.
 Panic attacks.
 Nocturnal panic attacks may include symptoms of gasping or choking during sleep
 that may be difficult to distinguish clinically from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. However,
 the lower frequency of episodes, intense autonomic arousal, and lack of excessive sleepiness
 differentiate nocturnal panic attacks from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Polysomnography
 (or OCST) in individuals with nocturnal panic attacks does not reveal the typical pattern of
 apneas or oxygen desaturation characteristic of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Individuals
 with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea do not provide a history of daytime panic attacks.
 Nocturnal asthma.
 Nocturnal asthma can often cause sudden awakening from sleep with
 symptoms of gasping or choking that are indistinguishable from dyspneic episodes resulting
 from obstructive sleep apnea. However, a history of asthma is generally present and
 polysomnography (or OCST) does not find evidence of apneas, hypopneas, or oxygen
 desaturation indicative of obstructive apnea. Nevertheless, nocturnal asthma and obstructive
 sleep apnea can coexist, and this can make it difficult to determine the relative contributions of
 each condition.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children may
 include symptoms of inattention, academic impairment, hyperactivity, and internalizing
 behaviors, all of which may also be symptoms of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.
 The presence of other symptoms and signs of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g.,
 labored breathing or snoring during sleep and adenotonsillar hypertrophy) would suggest the
 presence of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder may commonly co-occur, and there may be causal links between
 them; therefore, risk factors such as enlarged tonsils, obesity, or a family history of sleep apnea
 may help alert the clinician to their co-occurrence.
 Substance/medication-induced insomnia or hypersomnia.
 Substance use and substance withdrawal
 (including medications) can produce insomnia or hypersomnia. A careful history is usually
 sufficient to identify the relevant substance/medication, and follow-up shows improvement of the
 sleep disturbance after discontinuation of the substance/medication. In other cases, the use of a
 substance/medication (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opiates) has been shown to
 exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. An individual with symptoms and signs consistent
 with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should receive that diagnosis, even in the presence of
 concurrent substance use that is exacerbating the condition.