Inhalant Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent intended or unintended short-term, high-dose exposure to inhalant
 substances, including volatile hydrocarbons such as toluene or gasoline.
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
 belligerence, assaultiveness, apathy, impaired judgment) that developed during,
 or shortly after, exposure to inhalants.
 C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly
 after, inhalant use or exposure:
 1. Dizziness.
 2. Nystagmus.
 3. Incoordination.
 606
 4. Slurred speech.
 5. Unsteady gait.
 6. Lethargy.
 7. Depressed reflexes.
 8. Psychomotor retardation.
 9. Tremor.
 10. Generalized muscle weakness.
 11. Blurred vision or diplopia.
 12. Stupor or coma.
 13. Euphoria.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid
 inhalant use disorder. If a mild inhalant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
 code is F18.120, and if a moderate or severe inhalant use disorder is comorbid, the
 ICD-10-CM code is F18.220. If there is no comorbid inhalant use disorder, then the
 ICD-10-CM code is F18.920.
Note: For information on Development and Course, Risk and Prognostic Factors,
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, and Diagnostic Markers, see the corresponding
 sections in Inhalant Use Disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of inhalant intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
 behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or immediately after, intended or
 unintended inhalation of a volatile hydrocarbon substance. When possible, the particular
 substance involved should be named (e.g., toluene intoxication). Intoxication clears within a few
 minutes to a few hours after the exposure ends. Thus, inhalant intoxication usually occurs in
 brief episodes that may recur with further inhalant use.
 Associated Features
 Inhalant intoxication may be indicated by evidence of possession, or lingering odors, of inhalant
 substances (e.g., glue, paint thinner, gasoline, butane lighters); other features may include
 euphoria, relaxation, headache, rapid heartbeat, confusion, talkativeness, blurred vision, amnesia,
 slurred speech, irritability, nausea, fatigue, burning in eyes or throat, grandiosity, chest pain,
 auditory or visual hallucinations, and dissociation.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of actual episodes of inhalant intoxication in the general population is unknown,
 but it is probable that a majority of inhalant users would at some time exhibit behavioral or
 psychological changes and symptoms that would meet criteria for inhalant intoxication.
 Therefore, the prevalence of inhalant use and the prevalence of inhalant intoxication are likely
 similar. In 2017, inhalant use in the past year was reported by 0.6% of all Americans older than
 12 years; the prevalence was highest in younger age groups (2.3% for individuals ages 12 –17
 years, 1.6% for individuals ages 18–25 years, and 0.3% for individuals age 26 and older).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant intoxication in the general population are
 unknown. Regarding gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant use in the United
 607
 States, 0.8% of boys/men older than 12 years and 0.5% of girls/women older than 12 years have
 used inhalants in the previous year, but in the younger age groups differences are minimal or
 girls may have slightly higher prevalence (e.g., among adolescents ages 12–17 years, 2.4% of
 girls and 2.2% of boys have used inhalants in the past year).
 Functional Consequences of Inhalant Intoxication
 Use of inhaled substances in a closed container, such as a plastic bag over the head, may lead to
 unconsciousness, anoxia, and death. Separately, “sudden sniffing death,” likely from cardiac
 arrhythmia or arrest, may occur with various volatile inhalants. The enhanced toxicity of certain
volatile inhalants, such as butane or propane, also causes fatalities. Although inhalant
 intoxication itself is of short duration, it may produce persisting medical and neurological
 problems, especially if the intoxications are frequent. Clinically significant correlates of inhalant
 intoxication include reckless behaviors (e.g., taking foolish risks, getting into fights, having
 unprotected sex), antisocial behaviors (cruelty, damaging property, arrests), and having serious
 accidents.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Intoxication from other substances, especially from sedating substances (e.g., alcohol,
 benzodiazepines, barbiturates).
 These disorders may have similar signs and symptoms, but intoxication attributable to other
 intoxicants may be identified via a toxicology screen. Differentiating the source of the
 intoxication may involve discerning evidence of inhalant exposure as described for inhalant use
 disorder. A diagnosis of inhalant intoxication may be suggested by possession or lingering odors
 of inhalant substances (e.g., glue, paint thinner, gasoline, butane lighters); paraphernalia
 possession (e.g., rags or bags for concentrating glue fumes); perioral or perinasal “glue-sniffer’s
 rash”; reports from family or friends that the intoxicated individual possesses or uses inhalants;
 or apparent intoxication despite negative results on standard drug screens (which usually fail to
 identify inhalants).
 Inhalant-induced mental disorders.
 Inhalant intoxication is distinguished from inhalant-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., inhalant-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication) because
 the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated
 with inhalant intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to
 warrant independent clinical attention.
 Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, or infectious disorders that impair brain function
 and cognition.
 Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce the clinically significant
 behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, apathy, impaired
 judgment) that also characterize inhalant intoxication.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of inhalant intoxication with inhalant use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
 under Inhalant Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
 encountered.