 Inhalant Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of use of a hydrocarbon-based inhalant substance leading
 to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of
 the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
 1. The inhalant substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer
 period than was intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use
of the inhalant substance.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the inhalant
 substance, use it, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance.
 5. Recurrent use of the inhalant substance resulting in a failure to fulfill major
 role obligations at work, school, or home.
 6. Continued use of the inhalant substance despite having persistent or
 recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the
 effects of its use.
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of use of the inhalant substance.
 8. Recurrent use of the inhalant substance in situations in which it is physically
 hazardous.
 9. Use of the inhalant substance is continued despite knowledge of having a
 persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have
 been caused or exacerbated by the substance.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the inhalant substance to
 achieve intoxication or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 the inhalant substance.
 602
 Specify the particular inhalant: When possible, the particular substance involved
 should be named (e.g., “solvent use disorder”).
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for inhalant use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for inhalant use disorder have been met for at least 3
 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
 “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for inhalant use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for inhalant use disorder have been met at
 any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
 A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance,” may be
 met).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to inhalant substances is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If an inhalant intoxication or another
 inhalant-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for
 inhalant use disorder. Instead, the comorbid inhalant use disorder is indicated in the
4th character of the inhalant-induced disorder code (see the coding note for inhalant
 intoxication or a specific inhalant-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is
 comorbid inhalant-induced depressive disorder and inhalant use disorder, only the
 inhalant-induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating
 whether the comorbid inhalant use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F18.14 for
 mild inhalant use disorder with inhalant-induced depressive disorder or F18.24 for a
 moderate or severe inhalant use disorder with inhalant-induced depressive disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 F18.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F18.11 Mild, In early remission
 F18.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F18.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F18.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F18.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F18.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F18.21 Severe, In early remission
 F18.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 The severity of individuals’ inhalant use disorder is assessed by the number of diagnostic
 criteria endorsed. Changing severity of individuals’ inhalant use disorder across time is reflected
 by reductions in the frequency (e.g., days used per month) and/or dose (e.g., tubes of glue per
 day) used, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of others, clinician’s observations,
 and biological testing (when practical).
 Diagnostic Features
 Examples of inhalant substances include volatile hydrocarbons, which comprise toxic gases from
 glues, fuels, paints, and other volatile compounds. When possible, the
 603
 particular substance involved should be named (e.g., “toluene use disorder”). However, most
 compounds that are inhaled are a mixture of several substances that can produce psychoactive
 effects, and it is often difficult to ascertain the exact substance responsible for the disorder.
 Unless there is clear evidence that a single, unmixed substance has been used, the general term
 inhalant should be used in recording the diagnosis. Disorders arising from inhalation of nitrous
 oxide or of amyl-, butyl-, or isobutylnitrite are considered as other (or unknown) substance use
disorder.
 Features of inhalant use disorder include repeated use of an inhalant substance despite the
 individual’s knowing that the substance is causing serious problems for the individual (Criterion
 A9). Those problems are reflected in the diagnostic criteria.
 Missing work or school or inability to perform typical responsibilities at work or school
 (Criterion A5), and continued use of the inhalant substance even though it causes arguments with
 family or friends, fights, and other social or interpersonal problems (Criterion A6), may be seen
 in inhalant use disorder. Limiting family contact, work or school obligations, or recreational
 activities (e.g., sports, games, hobbies) may also occur (Criterion A7). Use of inhalants when
 driving or operating dangerous equipment (Criterion A8) is also seen.
 Tolerance (Criterion A10) is reported by about 10% of individuals who use inhalants.
 Because a clinically significant withdrawal syndrome has not been established with inhalant use,
 neither a diagnosis of inhalant withdrawal nor a corresponding diagnostic criterion for
 withdrawal complaints for inhalant use disorder is included. However, withdrawal symptoms
 may occur among inhalant users and individuals with moderate to severe inhalant use disorder,
 and these symptoms appear to be similar in frequency to withdrawal symptoms among those
 with moderate to severe cocaine use disorder.
 Associated Features
 A diagnosis of inhalant use disorder is supported by recurring episodes of intoxication with
 negative results in standard drug screens (which do not detect inhalants); possession, or lingering
 odors, of inhalant substances; peri-oral or peri-nasal “glue-sniffer’s rash”; association with other
 individuals known to use inhalants; membership in groups with prevalent inhalant use (e.g.,
 some native or aboriginal communities, homeless children in street gangs); easy access to certain
 inhalant substances; paraphernalia possession; presence of the disorder’s characteristic medical
 complications (e.g., brain white matter pathology, rhabdomyolysis); and the presence of multiple
 other substance use disorders. Individuals with inhalant use disorder may present with symptoms
 of pernicious anemia, subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord, major or mild
 neurocognitive disorder, brain atrophy, leukoencephalopathy, and many other nervous system
 disorders.
 Prevalence
 About 2.3% of American youth ages 12–17 years have used inhalants in the past 12 months, with
 0.1% having a pattern of use that meets criteria for inhalant use disorder. Among U.S. adults, age
 18 years and older, past 12-month prevalence of inhalant use is about 0.21%, with 0.04% having
 a pattern of use that meets criteria for an inhalant use disorder. Among youth, the prevalence of
 past 12-month inhalant use is highest among non-Hispanic Whites and individuals reporting
 more than one racialized identity and lowest among American Indians/Alaska Natives. Twelve
month prevalence rates of inhalant use and inhalant use disorder among adults are highest among
 non-Hispanic Whites and lowest among non-Hispanic Blacks and American Indians/Alaska
 Natives.
 Development and Course
The declining prevalence in the United States of inhalant use and inhalant use disorder after
 adolescence (from 2.3% during adolescence to 0.1% in early adulthood for inhalant use and from
 0.1% to 0.04% for inhalant use disorder) indicates that the disorder usually
 604
 remits in early adulthood. Inhalant use disorder is rare in prepubertal children, most common in
 adolescents and young adults, and uncommon in older persons. Calls to poison-control centers
 for “intentional abuse” of inhalants peak with calls involving individuals at age 14 years. Those
 with inhalant use disorder extending into adulthood demonstrate earlier onset of inhalant use, use
 of multiple inhalants, and more frequent inhalant use.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Environmental.
 Predictors of inhalant use disorder include sensation seeking and impulsivity.
 Inhalant gases are widely and legally available, increasing the risk of misuse.
 Childhood maltreatment or trauma also is associated with youthful progression from inhalant
 non-use to inhalant use disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Behavioral disinhibition is a highly heritable general propensity to not
 constrain behavior in socially acceptable ways, to break social norms and rules, and to take
 dangerous risks, pursuing rewards excessively despite dangers of adverse consequences. Youths
 with strong behavioral disinhibition show risk factors for inhalant use disorder: early-onset
 substance use disorder, multiple substance involvement, and early conduct problems. Because
 behavioral disinhibition is under strong genetic influence, youths in families with substance use
 and antisocial behaviors are at elevated risk for inhalant use disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Internationally, certain isolated Indigenous communities have experienced a high prevalence of
 inhalant problems. Also, in some low- and middle-income countries, groups of homeless
 children living on the streets have extensive inhalant use problems because of the effects of
 poverty and the availability and affordability of the substances, and as a way to cope with
 homelessness.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Although the past 12-month prevalence of inhalant use disorder in the United States is almost
 identical among adolescent boys and girls, the disorder is very rare among adult women.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Urine, breath, or saliva tests may be valuable for assessing concurrent use of non-inhalant
 substances by individuals with inhalant use disorder. However, technical problems and the
 considerable expense of analyses make frequent biological testing for inhalants themselves
 impractical.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In the United States, adolescent and adult inhalant use and inhalant use disorder are associated
 with suicidal thoughts and behavior, especially among individuals reporting symptoms of anxiety
 and depression and histories of trauma.
 Functional Consequences of Inhalant Use Disorder
 Because of inherent toxicity, use of inhalants can be fatal. Death can occur from anoxia, cardiac
 dysfunction, extreme allergic reaction, severe injury to the lungs, vomiting, accidents or injury,
 or central nervous system depression. Moreover, any inhaled volatile hydrocarbons may produce
 “sudden sniffing death” from cardiac arrhythmia. Inhalant use impairs neurobehavioral function
 and causes various neurological, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and pulmonary problems.
 605
 Long-term inhalant users are at increased risk for tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, sexually
 transmitted diseases, depression, anxiety, bronchitis, asthma, and sinusitis.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Inhalant exposure (unintentional) from industrial or other accidents.
 disorder only applies if the inhalant exposure is intentional.
 A diagnosis of inhalant use
 Inhalant intoxication, without meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder.
 Inhalant intoxication occurs
 frequently during inhalant use disorder but also may occur among individuals whose use does
 not meet criteria for inhalant use disorder.
 Inhalant intoxication meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder, and inhalant-induced mental
 disorders.
 Inhalant use disorder is differentiated from inhalant intoxication and inhalant-induced mental
 disorders (e.g., inhalant-induced depressive disorder) in that inhalant use disorder describes a
 problematic pattern of inhalant use that involves impaired control over inhalant use, social
 impairment attributable to inhalant use, risky inhalant use (e.g., inhalant use despite medical
 complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance), whereas inhalant
 intoxication and inhalant-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric syndromes that develop
 in the context of heavy use. Inhalant intoxication and inhalant-induced mental disorders occur
 frequently in individuals with inhalant use disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of inhalant
 intoxication or an inhalant-induced mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of
 inhalant use disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Other substance use disorders, especially those involving sedating substances (e.g., alcohol,
 benzodiazepines, barbiturates).
 Inhalant use disorder commonly co-occurs with other substance use disorders, and the symptoms
 of the disorders may be similar and overlapping. To disentangle symptom patterns, it is helpful
 to inquire about which symptoms persisted during periods when some of the substances were not
 being used.
 Comorbidity
 Individuals with inhalant use disorder receiving clinical care often have numerous other
 substance use, mood, anxiety, and personality disorders. Inhalant use disorder commonly co
occurs with conduct disorder in adolescents and with antisocial personality disorder. Individuals
 with inhalant use disorder may have comorbid symptoms of hepatic or renal damage,
 rhabdomyolysis, methemoglobinemia, or symptoms of other gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, or
 pulmonary diseases.