Differential Diagnosis
 Chronic medical conditions associated with pain and disability.
 Chronic medical conditions associated
 with pain and disability can also be associated with changes in personality. The diagnosis of
 personality change due to another medical condition is given only if a direct pathophysiological
 mechanism can be established. This diagnosis is not given if the change is due to a behavioral or
 psychological adjustment or response to another medical condition (e.g., dependent behaviors
 that result from a need for the assistance of others following a severe head trauma,
 cardiovascular disease, or dementia).
 Delirium or major neurocognitive disorder.
 Personality change is a frequently associated feature of a
delirium or major neurocognitive disorder. A separate diagnosis of personality change due to
 another medical condition is not given if the change occurs exclusively during the course of a
 delirium. However, the diagnosis of personality change due to another medical condition may be
 given in addition to the diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder if the personality change is
 judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive
 disorder and if the personality change is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
 Another mental disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of personality change due to
 another medical condition is not given if the disturbance is better explained by another mental
 disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., depressive disorder due to brain tumor).
 Substance use disorders.
 Personality changes may also occur in the context of substance use
 disorders, especially if the disorder is long-standing. The clinician should inquire carefully about
 the nature and extent of substance use. If the clinician wishes to indicate an etiological
 relationship between the personality change and substance use, the other specified category for
 the specific substance can be used (e.g., other specified stimulant-related disorder with
 personality change).
 Other mental disorders.
 Marked personality changes may also be an associated feature of other
 mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia; delusional disorder; depressive and bipolar disorders; other
 specified and unspecified disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; panic
 disorder). However, in these disorders, no specific physiological factor is judged to be
 etiologically related to the personality change.
 778
 Other personality disorders.
 Personality change due to another medical condition can be
 distinguished from a personality disorder by the requirement for a clinically significant change
 from baseline personality functioning and the presence of a specific etiological medical
 condition.