Avoidant Personality Disorder Diagnostic Criteria A pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following: 1. Avoids occupational activities that involve significant interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection. 2. Is unwilling to get involved with people unless certain of being liked. 765 3. Shows restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of being shamed or ridiculed. 4. Is preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations. 5. Is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy. 6. Views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others. 7. Is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because they may prove embarrassing. Diagnostic Features The essential feature of avoidant personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation that begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder avoid work activities that involve significant interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection (Criterion 1). Offers of job promotions may be declined because failure to manage the new responsibilities might result in criticism from coworkers. These individuals avoid making new friends unless they are certain they will be liked and accepted without criticism (Criterion 2). Until they pass stringent tests proving the contrary, other people are assumed to be critical and disapproving. Individuals with this disorder are highly avoidant of group activities. Interpersonal intimacy is often difficult for these individuals, although they are able to establish intimate relationships when there is assurance of uncritical acceptance. They may act with restraint, be reluctant to talk about themselves, and withhold intimate feelings for fear of being exposed, ridiculed, or shamed (Criterion 3). Because individuals with this disorder are preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations, they may have a markedly low threshold for detecting such reactions (Criterion 4). If someone is even slightly disapproving or critical, they may feel extremely hurt. They tend to be shy, quiet, inhibited, and “invisible” because of the fear that any attention would be critical or rejecting. They expect that no matter what they say, others will see it as “wrong,” and so they may say nothing at all. They react strongly to subtle cues that are suggestive of mockery or derision, and may misinterpret a neutral gesture or statement as critical or rejecting. Despite their longing to be active participants in social life, they fear placing their psychological welfare in the hands of others. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder are inhibited in new interpersonal situations because they feel inadequate and have low self-esteem (Criterion 5). These individuals believe themselves to be socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others (Criterion 6). Doubts concerning social competence and personal appeal may be most intense for some individuals in settings involving interactions with strangers. But many others report more difficulties with repeated interaction, when sharing of personal information would normally occur, thus, in the individual’s perception, increasing the chances that their inferiority would be revealed and that they would be rejected. When commencing a new ongoing social or occupational commitment requiring repeated interpersonal interaction, individuals may over weeks or months develop a growing conviction that others or colleagues view them as inferior or lacking worth, resulting in intolerable distress or anxiety that prompts resignation. Thus, a history of repeated job changes may be present. Individuals with this disorder are unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because these may prove embarrassing (Criterion 7). They are prone to exaggerate the potential dangers of ordinary situations, and a restricted lifestyle may result from their need for certainty and security. Associated Features Individuals with avoidant personality disorder often vigilantly appraise the movements and expressions of those with whom they come into contact. They are likely to 766 misinterpret social responses as critical, which in turn confirms their self-doubts. They are described by others as being “shy,” “timid,” “lonely,” and “isolated.” The major problems associated with this disorder occur in social and occupational functioning. The low self-esteem and hypersensitivity to rejection are associated with restricted interpersonal contacts. These individuals may become relatively isolated and usually do not have a large social support network that can help them weather crises. They desire affection and acceptance and may fantasize about idealized relationships with others. Avoidant behaviors can also adversely affect occupational functioning because these individuals try to avoid the types of social situations that may be important for meeting the basic demands of the job or for advancement. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder have been reported as having insecure attachment styles characterized by a desire for emotional attachment (which may include a preoccupation with previous and current relationships), but their fears that others may not value them or may hurt them may lead them to respond with passivity, anger, or fear. These attachment patterns have been referred to variously as “preoccupied” or “fearful” depending on the model employed by researchers. Prevalence The estimated prevalence of avoidant personality disorder based on a probability subsample from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 5.2%. The prevalence of avoidant personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions was 2.4%. A review of six epidemiological studies (four in the United States) found a median prevalence of 2.1%. Development and Course The avoidant behavior often starts in infancy or childhood with shyness, isolation, and fear of strangers and new situations. Although shyness in childhood is a common precursor of avoidant personality disorder, in most individuals it tends to gradually dissipate as they get older. In Social anxiety disorder. Agoraphobia. Other personality disorders and personality traits. contrast, individuals who go on to develop avoidant personality disorder may become increasingly shy and avoidant during adolescence and early adulthood, when social relationships with new people become especially important. There is some evidence that in adults, avoidant personality disorder tends to become less evident or to remit with age; the prevalence in adults older than 65 years has been estimated at 0.8%. This diagnosis should be used with great caution in children and adolescents, for whom shy and avoidant behavior may be developmentally appropriate. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues There may be variation in the degree to which different cultural and ethnic groups regard diffidence and avoidance as appropriate. Moreover, avoidant behavior may be the result of problems in acculturation following migration. In some sociocultural contexts, marked avoidance might occur following social embarrassment (“loss of face”) or failure to meet major life goals rather than temperamental shyness. In these settings, the goal of avoidance includes deliberate minimization of social interactions in order to preserve social harmony or prevent public offense. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Avoidant personality disorder appears to be more common in women than in men in community surveys. This gender difference in prevalence is small but consistently found in large population- based samples. 767 Differential Diagnosis There appears to be a great deal of overlap between avoidant personality disorder and social anxiety disorder. It has been suggested that they may represent different manifestations of similar underlying problems, or avoidant personality disorder may be a more severe form of social anxiety disorder. However, differences have also been described, especially in relation to self-concept (such as self-esteem and the sense of inferiority in avoidant personality disorder); the latter is indirect evidence as it shows that negative self-concept in social anxiety disorder may be unstable and thus less pervasive and entrenched than in avoidant personality disorder. Additionally, studies have shown that avoidant personality disorder frequently occurs in the absence of social anxiety disorder, and some separate risk factors have been identified, providing support for retaining two separate diagnostic categories. Avoidance characterizes both avoidant personality disorder and agoraphobia, and they often co-occur. They can be distinguished by the motivation for the avoidance (e.g., fear of panic or physical harm in agoraphobia). Other personality disorders may be confused with avoidant personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to avoidant personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Both avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder are characterized by feelings of Personality change due to another medical condition. Substance use disorders. F60.7 inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance. Similar behaviors (e.g., unassertiveness) and attributes (e.g., low self-esteem and low self-confidence) may be observed in both dependent personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder, although other behaviors are notably divergent, such as avoidance of social proximity in avoidant personality disorder but proximity-seeking in dependent personality disorder. The motivations behind similar behaviors may be quite different. For example, the unassertiveness in avoidant personality disorder is described as more closely related to fears of being rejected or humiliated, whereas in dependent personality disorder it is motivated by the desire to avoid being left to fend for oneself. However, avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder may be particularly likely to co-occur. Like avoidant personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder are characterized by social isolation. However, individuals with avoidant personality disorder want to have relationships with others and feel their loneliness deeply, whereas those with schizoid or schizotypal personality disorder may be content with and even prefer their social isolation. Paranoid personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder are both characterized by a reluctance to confide in others. However, in avoidant personality disorder, this reluctance is attributable more to a fear of humiliation or being found inadequate than to a fear of others’ malicious intent. Many individuals display avoidant personality traits. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute avoidant personality disorder. Avoidant personality disorder must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition. Avoidant personality disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use. 768 Comorbidity Other disorders that are commonly diagnosed with avoidant personality disorder include depressive disorders and anxiety disorders, especially social anxiety disorder. Avoidant personality disorder also tends to be diagnosed with schizoid personality disorder. Avoidant personality disorder is associated with increased rates of substance use disorders at a similar rate to the generalized form of social anxiety disorder.