 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder Due to
 Another Medical Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance, hoarding, skin
 picking, hair pulling, other body-focused repetitive behaviors, or other symptoms
 characteristic of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder predominate in the
 clinical picture.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
 medical condition.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Specify if:
With obsessive-compulsive disorder–like symptoms: If obsessive
compulsive disorder–like symptoms predominate in the clinical presentation.
 With appearance preoccupations: If preoccupation with perceived appearance
 defects or flaws predominates in the clinical presentation.
 With hoarding symptoms: If hoarding predominates in the clinical presentation.
 With hair-pulling symptoms: If hair pulling predominates in the clinical
 presentation.
 With skin-picking symptoms: If skin picking predominates in the clinical
 presentation.
 Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
 mental disorder (e.g., F06.8 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
 cerebral infarction). The other medical condition should be coded and listed
 separately immediately before the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due
 to the medical condition (e.g., I69.398 cerebral infarction; F06.8 obsessive
compulsive and related disorder due to cerebral infarction).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical
 condition is clinically significant obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms that are judged to
 be best explained as the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Symptoms can include prominent obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance,
 hoarding, hair pulling, skin picking, or other body-focused repetitive behaviors (Criterion A).
 The judgment that the symptoms are best explained by the associated medical condition must be
 based on evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B).
 Additionally, it must be judged that the symptoms are not better explained by another mental
 disorder (Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the obsessive-compulsive and related
 symptoms occur only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The obsessive-compulsive
 and related symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).
 292
 In determining whether the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms are attributable to
 another medical condition, a medical condition must be present at the time of the onset of the
 obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms. Furthermore, it must be established that obsessive
compulsive and related symptoms can be etiologically related to the medical condition through a
 pathophysiological mechanism and that this best explains the symptoms in the individual.
 Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the
 obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms and the medical condition is etiological,
 considerations that may provide some guidance in making this diagnosis include the presence of
 a clear temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the medical
 condition and the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms; the presence of features that are
 atypical of a primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or
course); and evidence in the literature that a known physiological mechanism (e.g., striatal
 damage due to a cerebral infarction) causes obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms. In
 addition, the disturbance cannot be better explained by a primary obsessive-compulsive and
 related disorder, a substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, or
 another mental disorder.
 There has been considerable attention to the question of whether obsessive-compulsive and
 related disorders can be attributed to Group A streptococcal infection. Sydenham’s chorea is the
 neurological manifestation of rheumatic fever, which is in turn due to Group A streptococcal
 infection. Sydenham’s chorea is characterized by a combination of motor and nonmotor
 symptoms. Nonmotor features include obsessions, compulsions, attention deficit, and emotional
 lability. Although individuals with Sydenham’s chorea may present with non-neuropsychiatric
 features of acute rheumatic fever, such as carditis and arthritis, they may present with obsessive
compulsive disorder–like symptoms; such individuals should be diagnosed with obsessive
compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections
 (PANDAS) has been identified as another postinfectious autoimmune disorder characterized by
 the sudden onset of obsessions, compulsions, and/or tics accompanied by a variety of acute
 neuropsychiatric symptoms in the absence of chorea, carditis, or arthritis, after Group A
 streptococcal infection. However, given that such acute-onset symptoms may be due to a range
 of other infections or insults, the term pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS)
 has been used. PANS is characterized by abrupt, dramatic onset of obsessive-compulsive
 symptoms or severely restricted food intake, together with a range of additional neuropsychiatric
 symptoms. Assessment guidelines for this syndrome are available.
 Associated Features
 A number of other medical conditions are known to include obsessive-compulsive and related
 symptoms as a manifestation. Examples include disorders leading to striatal damage, such as
 cerebral infarction or Huntington’s disorder.
 Development and Course
 The development and course of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another
 medical condition generally follows the course of the underlying illness.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory assessments and/or medical examinations are necessary to confirm the diagnosis of
 another medical condition.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Delirium.
 A separate diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another
 medical condition is not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a
 delirium. However, a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
 293
Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms)
 judged to be due to another medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (primary).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Associated feature of another mental disorder.
 Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder or unspecified obsessive
compulsive and related disorder.
 another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major neurocognitive
 disorder (dementia) if the etiology of the obsessive-compulsive symptoms is judged to be a
 physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the dementia and if obsessive
compulsive symptoms are a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
 If the presentation includes a mix of different types of symptoms, the specific mental disorder
 due to another medical condition depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical
 picture.
 If there is evidence of
 recent or prolonged substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal
 from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, a substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder should be considered. When a substance/medication-induced obsessive
compulsive and related disorder is being diagnosed in relation to drugs of abuse, it may be useful
 to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that
 occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) substance intoxication or withdrawal or
 after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/medication-induced obsessive
compulsive and related disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance
 used.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
 due to another medical condition should be distinguished from a primary obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder. In primary mental disorders, no specific and direct causative physiological
 mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be demonstrated. Acute-onset symptoms,
 late age at onset, or atypical symptoms suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the
 diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by a preoccupation with having
 or acquiring a serious illness. In the case of illness anxiety disorder, individuals may or may not
 have diagnosed medical conditions.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms may be
 an associated feature of another mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, anorexia nervosa).
 These diagnoses are given if it is unclear whether the obsessive-compulsive and related
 symptoms are primary, substance-induced, or due to another medical condition.