Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
 Diagnostic Criteria
 F63.3
 A. Recurrent pulling out of one’s hair, resulting in hair loss.
 B. Repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling.
 C. The hair pulling causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The hair pulling or hair loss is not attributable to another medical condition (e.g.,
 a dermatological condition).
 E. The hair pulling is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
 disorder (e.g., attempts to improve a perceived defect or flaw in appearance in
 body dysmorphic disorder).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) is the recurrent pulling out of
 one’s own hair (Criterion A). Hair pulling may occur from any region of the body in
 282
 which hair grows; the most common sites are the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelids, while less
 common sites are axillary, facial, pubic, and perirectal regions. Hair-pulling sites may vary over
 time. Hair pulling may occur in brief episodes scattered throughout the day or during less
 frequent but more sustained periods that can continue for hours, and such hair pulling may
 endure for months or years. Criterion A requires that hair pulling lead to hair loss, although
 individuals with this disorder may pull hair in a widely distributed pattern (i.e., pulling single
 hairs from all over a site) such that hair loss may not be clearly visible. In addition, individuals
 may attempt to conceal or camouflage hair loss (e.g., by using makeup, scarves, or wigs).
Individuals with trichotillomania have made repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling
 (Criterion B). Criterion C indicates that hair pulling causes clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. The term distress
 includes negative affects that may be experienced by individuals with hair pulling, such as
 feeling a loss of control, embarrassment, and shame. Significant impairment may occur in
 several different areas of functioning (e.g., social, occupational, academic, and leisure), in part
 because of avoidance of work, school, or other public situations.
 Associated Features
 Hair pulling may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving hair. Thus,
 individuals may search for a particular kind of hair to pull (e.g., hairs with a specific texture or
 color), may try to pull out hair in a specific way (e.g., so that the root comes out intact), or may
 visually examine or tactilely or orally manipulate the hair after it has been pulled (e.g., rolling the
 hair between the fingers, pulling the strand between the teeth, biting the hair into pieces, or
 swallowing the hair).
 Hair pulling may also be preceded or accompanied by various emotional states; it may be
 triggered by feelings of anxiety or boredom, may be preceded by an increasing sense of tension
 (either immediately before pulling out the hair or when attempting to resist the urge to pull), or
 may lead to gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the hair is pulled out. Hair-pulling
 behavior may involve varying degrees of conscious awareness, with some individuals displaying
 more focused attention on the hair pulling (with preceding tension and subsequent relief), and
 other individuals displaying more automatic behavior (in which the hair pulling seems to occur
 without full awareness). Many individuals report a mix of both behavioral styles. Some
 individuals experience an “itch-like” or tingling sensation in the scalp that is alleviated by the act
 of pulling hair. Pain does not usually accompany hair pulling.
 Patterns of hair loss are highly variable. Areas of complete alopecia, as well as areas of
 thinned hair density, are common. When the scalp is involved, there may be a predilection for
 pulling out hair in the crown or parietal regions. There may be a pattern of nearly complete
 baldness except for a narrow perimeter around the outer margins of the scalp, particularly at the
 nape of the neck (“tonsure trichotillomania”). Eyebrows and eyelashes may be completely
 absent.
 Hair pulling does not usually occur in the presence of other individuals, except immediate
 family members. Some individuals have urges to pull hair from other individuals and may
 sometimes try to find opportunities to do so surreptitiously. Some individuals may pull hairs
 from pets, dolls, and other fibrous materials (e.g., sweaters or carpets). Some individuals may
 deny their hair pulling to others. The majority of individuals with trichotillomania also have one
 or more other body-focused repetitive behaviors, including skin picking, nail biting, and lip
 chewing.
 Prevalence
 In the general population, data from nonrepresentative U.S. samples have suggested that the 12
month prevalence estimate for trichotillomania in adults and adolescents may be in
 283
the range of 1% to 2%. Women are more frequently affected than men in self-identified or
 clinical samples, at a ratio estimated at 10:1 or greater, but the gender ratio may be closer to 2:1
 in community samples. Among children with trichotillomania, boys and girls are more equally
 represented. An online survey of more than 10,000 adults ages 18–69 years, representative of the
 general U.S. population, found that 1.7% identified as having current trichotillomania and that
 rates did not differ significantly based on gender (1.8% of men and 1.7% of women).
 Development and Course
 Hair pulling may be seen in infants, and this behavior typically resolves during early
 development. Onset of hair pulling in trichotillomania most commonly coincides with, or follows
 the onset of, puberty. Sites of hair pulling may vary over time. The usual course of
 trichotillomania is chronic, with some waxing and waning if the disorder is untreated. Symptoms
 may worsen in females premenstrually but not consistently during pregnancy. For some
 individuals, the disorder may come and go for weeks, months, or years at a time. A minority of
 individuals remit without subsequent relapse within a few years of onset.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 There is evidence for a genetic vulnerability to trichotillomania. The
 disorder is more common in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and their
 first-degree relatives than in the general population.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Trichotillomania appears to manifest similarly across cultures and ethnicities, although there is a
 paucity of data from non-Western regions.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Most individuals with trichotillomania admit to hair pulling; thus, dermatopathological diagnosis
 is rarely required. Skin biopsy and dermoscopy (or trichoscopy) of trichotillomania are able to
 differentiate the disorder from other causes of alopecia. In trichotillomania, dermoscopy shows a
 range of characteristic features, including decreased hair density, short vellus hair, and broken
 hairs with different shaft lengths.
 Functional Consequences of Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
 Trichotillomania is associated with distress as well as with social and occupational impairment.
 There may be irreversible damage to hair growth and hair quality. Infrequent medical
 consequences of trichotillomania include digit purpura, musculoskeletal injury (e.g., carpal
 tunnel syndrome; back, shoulder and neck pain), blepharitis, and dental damage (e.g., worn or
 broken teeth resulting from hair biting). Swallowing of hair (trichophagia) may lead to
 trichobezoars, with subsequent anemia, abdominal pain, hematemesis, nausea and vomiting,
 bowel obstruction, and even bowel perforation.
 Differential Diagnosis
Normative hair removal/manipulation.
 Trichotillomania should not be diagnosed when hair removal
 is performed solely for cosmetic reasons (i.e., to improve physical appearance). Many
 individuals twist and play with their hair, but this behavior does not usually qualify for a
 diagnosis of trichotillomania. Some individuals may bite rather than pull hair; again, this does
 not qualify for a diagnosis of trichotillomania.
 284
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Individuals with OCD and symmetry concerns
 may pull out hairs as part of their symmetry rituals, and individuals with body dysmorphic
 disorder may remove body hair that they perceive as ugly, asymmetrical, or abnormal; in such
 cases a diagnosis of trichotillomania is not given.
 Stereotypic movement disorder.
 Stereotypic movement disorder can sometimes involve hair
pulling behavior. For example, a child with intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
 disability) or autism spectrum disorder may engage in stereotypic head banging, hand or arm
 biting, and hair pulling when frustrated or angry, and sometimes when excited. This behavior, if
 impairing, would be diagnosed as stereotypic movement disorder (co-occurring with intellectual
 developmental disorder or autism spectrum disorder) rather than trichotillomania.
 Psychotic disorder.
 Another medical condition.
 Individuals with a psychotic disorder may remove hair in response to a
 delusion or hallucination. Trichotillomania is not diagnosed in such cases.
 Trichotillomania is not diagnosed if the hair pulling or hair loss is
 attributable to another medical condition (e.g., inflammation of the skin or other dermatological
 conditions). Other causes of noncicatricial (nonscarring) alopecia (e.g., alopecia areata,
 androgenic alopecia, telogen effluvium) or cicatricial (scarring) (e.g., chronic discoid lupus
 erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, pseudopelade,
 folliculitis decalvans, dissecting folliculitis, acne keloidalis nuchae) should be considered in
 individuals with hair loss who deny hair pulling. Skin biopsy or dermoscopy can be used to
 differentiate individuals with trichotillomania from those with dermatological disorders.
 Substance-related disorders.
 Hair-pulling symptoms may be exacerbated by certain substances—
 for example, stimulants—but it is less likely that substances are the primary cause of persistent
 hair pulling.
 Comorbidity
 Trichotillomania is often accompanied by other mental disorders, most commonly major
 depressive disorder and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder. Repetitive body-focused symptoms
 other than hair pulling or skin picking (e.g., nail biting) occur in the majority of individuals with
 trichotillomania and may deserve an additional diagnosis of other specified obsessive
compulsive and related disorder (i.e., other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder).