 Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
 F42.4
 Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent skin picking resulting in skin lesions.
 B. Repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.
 C. The skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The skin picking is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., scabies).
 E. The skin picking is not better explained by symptoms of another mental disorder
 (e.g., delusions or tactile hallucinations in a psychotic disorder, attempts to
 improve a perceived defect or flaw in appearance in body dysmorphic disorder,
 stereotypies in stereotypic movement disorder, or intention to harm oneself in
 nonsuicidal self-injury).
 285
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of excoriation (skin-picking) disorder is recurrent picking at one’s own skin
 (Criterion A). The most commonly picked sites are the face, arms, and hands, but many
 individuals pick from multiple body sites. Individuals may pick at healthy skin, at minor skin
 irregularities, at lesions such as pimples or calluses, or at scabs from previous picking. Most
 individuals pick with their fingernails, although many use tweezers, pins, or other objects. In
 addition to skin picking, there may be skin rubbing, squeezing, lancing, and biting. Individuals
 with excoriation disorder often spend significant amounts of time on their picking behavior,
 sometimes several hours per day, and such skin picking may endure for months or years.
 Criterion A requires that skin picking lead to skin lesions, although individuals with this disorder
 often attempt to conceal or camouflage such lesions (e.g., with makeup or clothing). Individuals
 with excoriation disorder have made repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking (Criterion
 B).
 Criterion C indicates that skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. The term distress includes negative
 affects that may be experienced by individuals with skin picking, such as feeling a loss of
 control, embarrassment, and shame. Significant impairment may occur in several different areas
 of functioning (e.g., social, occupational, academic, and leisure), in part because of avoidance of
 social situations.
 Associated Features
 Skin picking may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving skin or scabs.
 Thus, individuals may search for a particular kind of scab to pull, and they may examine, play
 with, or mouth or swallow the skin after it has been pulled. Skin picking may also be preceded or
 accompanied by various emotional states. Skin picking may be triggered by feelings of anxiety
 or boredom, may be preceded by an increasing sense of tension (either immediately before
 picking the skin or when attempting to resist the urge to pick), and may lead to gratification,
 pleasure, or a sense of relief when the skin or scab has been picked. Some individuals report
picking in response to a minor skin irregularity or to relieve an uncomfortable bodily sensation.
 Pain is not routinely reported to accompany skin picking. Some individuals engage in skin
 picking that is more focused (i.e., with preceding tension and subsequent relief), whereas others
 engage in more automatic picking (i.e., when skin picking occurs without preceding tension and
 without full awareness), and many have a mix of both behavioral styles. Skin picking does not
 usually occur in the presence of other individuals, except immediate family members. Some
 individuals report picking the skin of others.
 Prevalence
 An online survey of more than 10,000 adults, ages 18–69 years, age- and gender-matched to the
 U.S. population, found that 2.1% identified as having current excoriation disorder and 3.1%
 reported lifetime excoriation disorder. Three-quarters or more of individuals with the disorder are
 women in community samples.
 Development and Course
 Although individuals with excoriation disorder may present at various ages, the skin picking
 most often has onset during adolescence, commonly coinciding with or following the onset of
 puberty. The disorder frequently begins with a dermatological condition, such as acne. Sites of
 skin picking may vary over time. The usual course is chronic, with some waxing and waning if
 untreated. For some individuals, the disorder may come and go for weeks, months, or years at a
 time.
 286
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 There is evidence for a genetic vulnerability to excoriation disorder.
 The disorder is more common in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and
 their first-degree family members than in the general population.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There are limited data on the prevalence and clinical characteristics of excoriation disorder
 across cultures. However, clinical features appear similar in studies of individuals in the United
 States and other countries.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Most individuals with excoriation disorder admit to skin picking; therefore, dermatopathological
 diagnosis is rarely required. However, the disorder may have characteristic features on
 histopathology.
 Functional Consequences of Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
 Excoriation disorder is associated with social and occupational impairment. The majority of
 individuals with this condition spend at least 1 hour per day picking, thinking about picking, and
 resisting urges to pick. Many individuals report avoiding social or entertainment events as well
as going out in public. A majority of individuals with the disorder also report experiencing work
 interference from skin picking on at least a daily or weekly basis. A significant proportion of
 students with excoriation disorder report having missed school, having experienced difficulties
 managing responsibilities at school, or having had difficulties studying because of skin picking.
 Medical complications of skin picking include tissue damage, scarring, and infection and can be
 life-threatening. Rarely, synovitis of the wrists resulting from chronic picking has been reported.
 Skin picking often results in significant tissue damage and scarring. It frequently requires
 antibiotic treatment for infection, and on occasion it may require surgery.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Psychotic disorder.
 Skin picking may occur in response to a delusion (i.e., parasitosis) or tactile
 hallucination (i.e., formication) in a psychotic disorder. In such cases, excoriation disorder
 should not be diagnosed.
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Excessive washing compulsions in response to
 contamination obsessions in individuals with OCD may lead to skin lesions, and skin picking
 may occur in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder who pick their skin because of
 appearance concerns; in such cases, excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. The
 description of other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder in other specified obsessive
compulsive and related disorder excludes individuals whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria
 for excoriation disorder.
 Neurodevelopmental disorders.
 While stereotypic movement disorder may be characterized by
 repetitive self-injurious behavior, onset is in the early developmental period. For example,
 individuals with the neurogenetic condition Prader-Willi syndrome may have early onset of skin
 picking, and their symptoms may meet criteria for stereotypic movement disorder. While tics in
 individuals with Tourette’s disorder may lead to self-injury, the behavior is not tic-like in
 excoriation disorder.
 287
 Dermatitis artefacta.
 Dermatitis artefacta (also referred to as “factitious dermatitis”) is a term used
 in dermatology to refer to medically unexplained, presumably self-induced skin lesions that the
 individual denies any role in creating. Cases in which there is evidence of deception on the
 individual’s part concerning the skin lesions can be diagnosed as either malingering (if the skin
 picking is motivated by external incentives) or factitious disorder (if the skin picking occurs in
 the absence of obvious external rewards). In the absence of deception, excoriation disorder can
 be diagnosed if there are repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.
 Other disorders.
 Other medical conditions.
 Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily attributable
 to the intention to harm oneself that is characteristic of nonsuicidal self-injury.
 Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily
 attributable to another medical condition. For example, scabies is a dermatological condition
 invariably associated with severe itching and scratching. However, excoriation disorder may be
 precipitated or exacerbated by an underlying dermatological condition. For example, acne may
 lead to some scratching and picking, which may also be associated with comorbid excoriation
Substance/medication-induced disorders.
 disorder (so-called acne excoriée). The differentiation between these two clinical situations (acne
 with some scratching and picking vs. acne with comorbid excoriation disorder) requires an
 assessment of the extent to which the individual’s skin picking has become independent of the
 underlying dermatological condition.
 Skin-picking symptoms may also be induced by certain
 substances (e.g., cocaine), in which case excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. If such
 skin picking is clinically significant, then a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder should be considered.
 Comorbidity
 Excoriation disorder is often accompanied by other mental disorders. Such disorders include
 OCD and trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), as well as major depressive disorder.
 Depression comorbidity seems to be more common in women. Repetitive body-focused
 symptoms other than skin picking and hair pulling (e.g., nail biting) occur in many individuals
 with excoriation disorder and may deserve an additional diagnosis of other specified obsessive
compulsive and related disorder (i.e., other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder)