Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both:
 Obsessions are defined by (1) and (2):
 1. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at
 some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in
 most individuals cause marked anxiety or distress.
 2. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, urges, or
 images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action (i.e., by
 performing a compulsion).
 Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2):
 1. Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts
 (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) that the individual feels
 driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must
 be applied rigidly.
 2. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or
 distress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these
behaviors or mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they
 are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are clearly excessive.
 Note: Young children may not be able to articulate the aims of these
 behaviors or mental acts.
 B. The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hour
 per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological
 effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical
 condition.
 D. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
 disorder (e.g., excessive worries, as in generalized anxiety disorder;
 preoccupation with appearance, as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty
 discarding or parting with possessions, as in hoarding disorder; hair pulling, as in
 trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder]; skin picking, as in excoriation [skin
picking] disorder; stereotypies, as in stereotypic movement disorder; ritualized
 eating behavior, as in eating disorders; preoccupation with substances or
 gambling, as in substance-related and addictive disorders; preoccupation with
 having an illness, as in illness anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies, as in
 paraphilic disorders; impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct
 disorders; guilty ruminations, as in major depressive disorder; thought insertion
 or delusional preoccupations, as in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
 disorders; or repetitive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum disorder).
 266
 Specify if:
 With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that obsessive-compulsive
 disorder beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be
 true.
 With poor insight: The individual thinks obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs
 are probably true.
 With absent insight/delusional beliefs: The individual is completely convinced
 that obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true.
 Specify if:
 Tic-related: The individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder.
 Specifiers
 Individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) vary in the degree of insight they have
 about the accuracy of the beliefs that underlie their obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Many
 individuals have good or fair insight (e.g., the individual believes that the house definitely will
 not, probably will not, or may or may not burn down if the stove is not checked 30 times). Some
have poor insight (e.g., the individual believes that the house will probably burn down if the
 stove is not checked 30 times), and a few (4% or less) have absent insight/delusional beliefs
 (e.g., the individual is convinced that the house will burn down if the stove is not checked 30
 times). Insight can vary within an individual over the course of the illness. Poorer insight has
 been linked to worse long-term outcome.
 Up to 30% of individuals with OCD have a lifetime tic disorder. This is most common in
 men with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals tend to differ from those without a
 history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD symptoms, comorbidity, course, and pattern
 of familial transmission.
 Diagnostic Features
 The characteristic symptoms of OCD are the presence of obsessions and compulsions (Criterion
 A). Obsessions are repetitive and persistent thoughts (e.g., of contamination), images (e.g., of
 violent or horrific scenes), or urges (e.g., to stab someone). Importantly, obsessions are not
 pleasurable or experienced as voluntary: they are intrusive and unwanted and cause marked
 distress or anxiety in most individuals. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress these
 obsessions (e.g., avoiding triggers or using thought suppression) or to neutralize them with
 another thought or action (e.g., performing a compulsion). Compulsions (or rituals) are repetitive
 behaviors (e.g., washing, checking) or mental acts (e.g., counting, repeating words silently) that
 the individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must
 be applied rigidly. Most individuals with OCD have both obsessions and compulsions.
 Obsessions and compulsions are typically thematically related (e.g., thoughts of contamination
 associated with washing rituals; thoughts of harm associated with repeated checking).
 Individuals often report that they perform compulsions to reduce the distress triggered by
 obsessions or to prevent a feared event (e.g., becoming ill). However, these compulsions either
 are not connected in a realistic way to the feared event (e.g., arranging items symmetrically to
 prevent harm to a loved one) or are clearly excessive (e.g., showering for hours each day).
 Compulsions are not done for pleasure, although individuals may experience temporary relief
 from anxiety or distress.
 The specific content of obsessions and compulsions varies between individuals. However,
 certain themes, or dimensions, are common, including those of cleaning (contamination
 obsessions and cleaning compulsions); symmetry (symmetry obsessions and repeating, ordering,
 and counting compulsions); forbidden or taboo thoughts (e.g., aggressive, sexual, or religious
 obsessions and related compulsions); and harm (e.g., fears of harm to self or others and checking
 compulsions). Some individuals also have difficulties discarding and accumulate objects as a
 consequence of typical obsessions and
 267
 compulsions (e.g., fears of harming others); such compulsions must be distinguished from
 the primary accumulation behaviors seen in hoarding disorder, discussed later in this chapter.
 These themes occur across different cultures, are relatively consistent over time in adults with the
 disorder, and may be associated with different neural substrates. Importantly, individuals often
 have symptoms in more than one dimension.
Criterion B emphasizes that obsessions and compulsions must be time-consuming (e.g., more
 than 1 hour per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment to warrant a diagnosis
 of OCD. This criterion helps to distinguish the disorder from the occasional intrusive thoughts or
 repetitive behaviors that are common in the general population (e.g., double-checking that a door
 is locked). The frequency and severity of obsessions and compulsions vary across individuals
 with OCD (e.g., some have mild to moderate symptoms, spending 1–3 hours per day obsessing
 or doing compulsions, whereas others have nearly constant intrusive thoughts or compulsions
 that can be incapacitating).
 Associated Features
 Sensory phenomena, defined as physical experiences (e.g., physical sensations, just-right
 sensations, and feelings of incompleteness) that precede compulsions, are common in OCD. Up
 to 60% of individuals with OCD report these phenomena.
 Individuals with OCD experience a range of affective responses when confronted with
 situations that trigger obsessions and compulsions. For example, many individuals experience
 marked anxiety that can include recurrent panic attacks. Others report strong feelings of disgust.
 While performing compulsions, some individuals report a distressing sense of “incompleteness”
 or uneasiness until things look, feel, or sound “just right.”
 It is common for individuals with the disorder to avoid people, places, and things that trigger
 obsessions and compulsions. For example, individuals with contamination concerns might avoid
 public situations (e.g., restaurants, public restrooms) to reduce exposure to feared contaminants;
 individuals with intrusive thoughts about causing harm might avoid social interactions.
 Many individuals with OCD have dysfunctional beliefs. These beliefs can include an inflated
 sense of responsibility and the tendency to overestimate threat; perfectionism and intolerance of
 uncertainty; and overimportance of thoughts (e.g., believing that having a forbidden thought is as
 bad as acting on it) and the need to control thoughts. These beliefs, however, are not specific to
 OCD. The involvement of family or friends in compulsive rituals, termed accommodation, can
 exacerbate or maintain symptoms and is an important target in treatment, especially in children.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of OCD in the United States is 1.2%, with a similar prevalence
 internationally (including Canada, Puerto Rico, Germany, Taiwan, Korea, and New Zealand;
 1.1%–1.8%). Women are affected at a slightly higher rate than men in adulthood, although men
 are more commonly affected in childhood.
 Development and Course
 In the United States, the mean age at onset of OCD is 19.5 years, and 25% of cases start by age
 14 years. Onset after age 35 years is unusual but does occur. Men have an earlier age at onset
 than women: nearly 25% of men have onset before age 10 years. The onset of symptoms is
 typically gradual; however, acute onset can also occur.
 If OCD is untreated, the course is usually chronic, often with waxing and waning symptoms.
 Some individuals have an episodic course, and a minority have a deteriorating course. Without
 treatment, remission rates in adults are low (e.g., 20% for those reevaluated 40 years later). Onset
in childhood or adolescence can lead to a lifetime of OCD.
 268
 However, 40% of individuals with onset of OCD in childhood or adolescence may
 experience remission by early adulthood. The course of OCD is often complicated by the co
occurrence of other disorders (see section “Comorbidity” for this disorder).
 Compulsions are more easily diagnosed in children than obsessions are because compulsions
 are usually observable. However, most children have both obsessions and compulsions (as do
 most adults). The pattern of symptoms in adults can be stable over time, but it is more variable in
 children. Some differences in the content of obsessions and compulsions have been reported
 when children and adolescent samples are compared with adult samples. These differences likely
 reflect content appropriate to different developmental stages (e.g., higher rates of sexual and
 religious obsessions in adolescents than in children; higher rates of harm obsessions [e.g., fears
 of catastrophic events, such as death or illness to self or loved ones] in children and adolescents
 than in adults).
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Greater internalizing symptoms, higher negative emotionality, and behavioral
 inhibition in childhood are possible temperamental risk factors.
 Environmental.
 Different environmental factors may increase the risk for OCD. These include
 adverse perinatal events, premature birth, maternal tobacco use during pregnancy, physical and
 sexual abuse in childhood, and other stressful or traumatic events. Some children may develop
 the sudden onset of obsessive-compulsive symptoms, which has been associated with different
 environmental factors, including various infectious agents and a postinfectious autoimmune
 syndrome.
 Genetic and physiological.
 The rate of OCD among first-degree relatives of adults with OCD is
 approximately two times that among first-degree relatives of those without the disorder;
 however, among first-degree relatives of individuals with onset of OCD in childhood or
 adolescence, the rate is increased 10-fold. Familial transmission is due in part to genetic factors
 (e.g., a concordance rate of 0.57 for monozygotic vs. 0.22 for dizygotic twins). Twin studies
 suggest that additive genetic effects account for ~40% of the variance in obsessive-compulsive
 symptoms. Dysfunction in the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and striatum have
 been most strongly implicated; alterations in frontolimbic, frontoparietal, and cerebellar
 networks have also been reported.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 OCD occurs across the world. There is substantial similarity across cultures in the gender
 distribution, age at onset, and comorbidity of OCD. Moreover, around the globe, there is a
 similar symptom structure involving cleaning, symmetry, hoarding, taboo thoughts, and fear of
 harm. However, regional variation in symptom expression exists, and cultural factors may shape
 the content of obsessions and compulsions. For example, obsessions related to sexual content
 may be reported less frequently in some religious and cultural groups, and obsessions related to
 violence and aggression may be more common in settings with higher prevalence of urban
violence. Attributions of OCD symptoms vary cross-culturally, including physical, social,
 spiritual, and supernatural causes; specific compulsions and help-seeking options may be
 reinforced by these cultural attributions.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Men have an earlier age at onset of OCD than women, often in childhood, and are more likely to
 have comorbid tic disorders. Onset in girls is more typically in adolescence; among adults, OCD
 is slightly more common in women than in men. Gender differences in the pattern of symptom
 dimensions have been reported, with, for example, women more likely to have symptoms in the
 cleaning dimension and men more likely to have
 269
 symptoms in the forbidden thoughts and symmetry dimensions. Onset or exacerbation of OCD,
 as well as symptoms that can interfere with the mother-infant relationship (e.g., aggressive
 obsessions such as intrusive violent thoughts of harming the infant, leading to avoidance of the
 infant), has been reported in the peripartum period. Some women also report exacerbation of
 OCD symptoms premenstrually.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 A systematic literature review of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in clinical samples with
 OCD from multiple countries found a mean rate of lifetime suicide attempts of 14.2%, a mean
 rate of lifetime suicidal ideation of 44.1%, and a mean rate of current suicidal ideation of 25.9%.
 Predictors of greater suicide risk were severity of OCD, the symptom dimension of unacceptable
 thoughts, severity of comorbid depressive and anxiety symptoms, and past history of suicidality.
 Another international systematic review of 48 studies found a moderate to high significant
 association between suicidal ideation/suicide attempts and OCD.
 A cross-sectional study of 582 outpatients with OCD from Brazil found that 36% reported
 lifetime suicidal thoughts, 20% had made suicide plans, 11% had already attempted suicide, and
 10% presented with current suicidal thoughts. The sexual/religious dimension of OCD and
 comorbid substance use disorders were associated with suicidal thoughts and suicide plans,
 impulse-control disorders were associated with current suicidal thoughts and with suicide plans
 and attempts, and lifetime comorbid major depressive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder
 (PTSD) were associated with all aspects of suicidal behaviors.
 In a study using Swedish national registry data involving 36,788 individuals with OCD and
 matched general population control subjects, individuals with OCD had a higher risk of suicide
 death (OR = 9.8) and suicide attempt (OR = 5.5), and the increased risk for both outcomes
 remained substantial even after adjusting for psychiatric comorbidities. Comorbid personality or
 substance use disorder increased suicide risk, whereas female gender, higher parental education,
 and a comorbid anxiety disorder were protective factors.
 Functional Consequences of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
 OCD is associated with reduced quality of life as well as high levels of social and occupational
 impairment. Impairment occurs across many different domains of life and is associated with
symptom severity. Impairment can be caused by the time spent obsessing and performing
 compulsions. Avoidance of situations that can trigger obsessions or compulsions can also
 severely impair functioning. In addition, specific symptoms can create specific obstacles. For
 example, obsessions about harm can make relationships with family and friends feel hazardous;
 the result can be avoidance of these relationships. Obsessions about symmetry can derail the
 timely completion of school or work projects because the project never feels “just right,”
 potentially resulting in school failure or job loss. Health consequences can also occur. For
 example, individuals with contamination concerns may avoid doctors’ offices and hospitals (e.g.,
 because of fears of exposure to germs) or develop dermatological problems (e.g., skin lesions
 due to excessive washing). Sometimes the symptoms of the disorder interfere with its own
 treatment (e.g., when medications are considered contaminated). When the disorder starts in
 childhood or adolescence, individuals may experience developmental difficulties. For example,
 adolescents may avoid socializing with peers; young adults may struggle when they leave home
 to live independently. The result can be few significant relationships outside the family and a
 lack of autonomy and financial independence from their family of origin. In addition, some
 individuals with OCD try to impose rules and prohibitions on family members because of their
 obsessions
 270
 (e.g., no one in the family can have visitors to the house for fear of contamination), and this can
 lead to family dysfunction.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Anxiety disorders.
 Recurrent thoughts, avoidant behaviors, and repetitive requests for reassurance
 can also occur in anxiety disorders. However, the recurrent thoughts that are present in
 generalized anxiety disorder (i.e., worries) are usually about real-life concerns, whereas the
 obsessions of OCD usually do not involve real-life concerns and can include content that is odd,
 irrational, or of a seemingly magical nature; moreover, compulsions are usually present and
 usually linked to the obsessions. Like individuals with OCD, individuals with specific phobia
 can have a fear reaction to specific objects or situations; however, in specific phobia the feared
 object is usually much more circumscribed, and rituals are not present. In social anxiety disorder,
 the feared objects or situations are limited to social interactions or performance situations, and
 avoidance or reassurance seeking is focused on reducing feelings of embarrassment.
 Major depressive disorder.
 OCD needs to be distinguished from the rumination of major
 depressive disorder, in which thoughts are usually mood-congruent and not necessarily
 experienced as intrusive or distressing; moreover, ruminations are not linked to compulsions, as
 is typical in OCD.
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 In body dysmorphic disorder, the obsessions and
 compulsions are limited to concerns about physical appearance; and in trichotillomania (hair
pulling disorder), the compulsive behavior is limited to hair pulling in the absence of obsessions.
 Hoarding disorder symptoms focus exclusively on the persistent difficulty discarding or parting
 with possessions, marked distress associated with discarding items, and excessive accumulation
 of objects. However, if an individual has obsessions that are typical of OCD (e.g., concerns about
incompleteness or harm), and these obsessions lead to compulsive accumulation (e.g., acquiring
 all objects in a set to attain a sense of completeness or not discarding old newspapers because
 they may contain information that could prevent harm), a diagnosis of OCD should be given
 instead.
 Eating disorders.
 OCD can be distinguished from anorexia nervosa in that in OCD the obsessions
 and compulsions are not limited to concerns about weight and food.
 Tics (in tic disorder) and stereotyped movements.
 A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic
 motor movement or vocalization (e.g., eye blinking, throat clearing). A stereotyped movement is
 a repetitive, seemingly driven, nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g., head banging, body rocking,
 self-biting). Tics and stereotyped movements are typically less complex than compulsions and
 are not aimed at neutralizing obsessions. However, distinguishing between complex tics and
 compulsions can be difficult. Whereas compulsions are usually preceded by obsessions, tics are
 often preceded by premonitory sensory urges. Some individuals have symptoms of both OCD
 and a tic disorder, in which case both diagnoses may be warranted.
 Psychotic disorders.
 Some individuals with OCD have poor insight or even delusional OCD
 beliefs. However, they have obsessions and compulsions (distinguishing their condition from
 delusional disorder) and do not have other features of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder
 (e.g., hallucinations or disorganized speech). For individuals whose OCD symptoms warrant the
 “with absent insight/delusional beliefs” specifier, these symptoms should not be diagnosed as a
 psychotic disorder.
 Other compulsive-like behaviors.
 Certain behaviors are sometimes described as “compulsive,”
 including sexual behavior (in the case of paraphilias), gambling (i.e., gambling disorder), and
 substance use (e.g., alcohol use disorder). However, these behaviors differ
 271
 from the compulsions of OCD in that the person usually derives pleasure from the activity and
 may wish to resist it only because of its deleterious consequences.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
 Although obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
 and OCD have similar names, the clinical manifestations of these disorders are quite different.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is not characterized by intrusive thoughts, images, or
 urges or by repetitive behaviors that are performed in response to these intrusive symptoms;
 instead, it involves an enduring and pervasive maladaptive pattern of excessive perfectionism
 and rigid control. If an individual manifests symptoms of both OCD and obsessive-compulsive
 personality disorder, both diagnoses can be given.
 Comorbidity
 Individuals with OCD often have other psychopathology. Many adults with the disorder in the
 United States have a lifetime diagnosis of an anxiety disorder (76%; e.g., panic disorder, social
 anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia) or a depressive or bipolar
 disorder (63% for any depressive or bipolar disorder, with the most common being major
 depressive disorder [41%]); a lifetime diagnosis of an impulse-control disorder (56%) or a
 substance use disorder (39%) is also common. Onset of OCD is usually later than for most
F45.22
 comorbid anxiety disorders (with the exception of separation anxiety disorder) and PTSD but
 often precedes that of depressive disorders. In a study of 214 treatment-seeking adults in the
 United States with DSM-IV OCD at intake, comorbid obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
 was found in 23%–32% of individuals followed longitudinally.
 Up to 30% of individuals with OCD also have a lifetime tic disorder. A comorbid tic disorder
 is most common in men with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals tend to differ from
 those without a history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD symptoms, comorbidity,
 course, and pattern of familial transmission. A triad of OCD, tic disorder, and attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder can also be seen in children.
 Several obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, including body dysmorphic disorder,
 trichotillomania, and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, also occur more frequently in
 individuals with OCD than in those without OCD.
 OCD is also much more common in individuals with certain other disorders than would be
 expected based on its prevalence in the general population; when one of those other disorders is
 diagnosed, the individual should be assessed for OCD as well. For example, in individuals with
 schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the prevalence of OCD is approximately 12%. Rates
 of OCD are also elevated in bipolar disorder; eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and
 bulimia nervosa; body dysmorphic disorder; and Tourette’s disorder.