 Substance/Medication-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive
 and Related Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Obsessions, compulsions, skin picking, hair pulling, other body-focused
 repetitive behaviors, or other symptoms characteristic of the obsessive
compulsive and related disorders predominate in the clinical picture.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 288
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by an obsessive-compulsive and related
 disorder that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an
 independent obsessive-compulsive and related disorder could include the
 following:
 The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
 evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non
substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
 (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: This diagnosis should be made in addition to a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
 attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are indicated in the table below. Note
 that the ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance
 use disorder present for the same class of substance. In any case, an additional
 separate diagnosis of a substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use
 disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
 disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should record “mild
 [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and
 related disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced obsessive
compulsive and related disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is
 comorbid with the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder,
 the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate
 [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the
 severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance
 use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th
 position character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder.
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.188 F15.288 F15.988
 Cocaine F14.188 F14.288 F14.988
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.188 F19.288 F19.988
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
 substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
289
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
 medication.
 Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder begins
 with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine) that is presumed to be causing the obsessive
compulsive and related symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the
 criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance
 use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., ropinirole), the code for
 “other (or unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to
 be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also
 be used.
 To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
 first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
 disorder” (incorporating the name of the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by
 the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset
 after medication use). For example, in the case of repetitive skin-picking occurring during
 intoxication in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.288 severe cocaine
 use disorder with cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, with onset during
 intoxication. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the
 substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder occurs without a comorbid
 substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying
 substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.988 amphetamine-induced obsessive-compulsive and
 related disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is judged to play
 a significant role in the development of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, each
 should be listed separately.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
 disorder are prominent symptoms of an obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (Criterion A)
 that are judged to be attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., drug of abuse, medication).
 The obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms must have developed during or soon
 after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication
 or toxin, and the substance/medication must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion
 B). Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to a prescribed
 treatment for a mental disorder or other medical condition must have its onset while the
 individual is receiving the medication. Once the treatment is discontinued, the obsessive
compulsive and related disorder symptoms will usually improve or remit within days to weeks
(depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and the presence of withdrawal). The
 diagnosis of substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder should not
 be given if onset of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms precedes the
 substance/medication use, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time, usually
 longer than 1 month, from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal. The
 substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis should be
 made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the
 symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to
 warrant independent clinical attention.
 290
 Associated Features
 Obsessions, compulsions, hair pulling, skin picking, or other body-focused repetitive behaviors
 can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of substances: stimulants
 (including cocaine) and other (or unknown) substances. Heavy metals and toxins may also cause
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms.
 Prevalence
 In the U.S. general population, the very limited data that are available indicate that
 substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is very rare.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
 symptoms may occur in the context of substance intoxication and substance withdrawal. The
 diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific withdrawal will usually
 suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder either with onset during intoxication or with onset
 during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance
 withdrawal if the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms are judged to be in excess
 of those usually associated with intoxication or withdrawal and are sufficiently severe to warrant
 clinical attention.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance).
 Substance/medication
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is distinguished from a primary obsessive
compulsive and related disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors with respect
 to substances/medications. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence from the history, physical
 examination, or laboratory findings for use or intoxication. Substance/medication-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder arises only in association with intoxication, whereas a
 primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder may precede the onset of
 substance/medication use. The presence of features that are atypical of a primary obsessive
compulsive and related disorder, such as atypical age at onset of symptoms, may suggest a
 substance-induced etiology. A primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis is
 warranted if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (about 1 month or longer) after
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Delirium.
 F06.8
 the end of the substance intoxication or the individual has a history of an obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder.
 If the obsessive
compulsive and related symptoms are attributable to another medical condition (i.e., rather than
 to the medication taken for the other medical condition), obsessive-compulsive and related
 disorder due to another medical condition should be diagnosed. The history often provides the
 basis for judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the other medical condition (e.g.,
 medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine whether the medication
 is the causative agent (in which case the symptoms may be better explained by
 substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder). If the disturbance is
 attributable to both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., obsessive
compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient
 evidence to determine whether the symptoms are attributable to a substance/medication or to
 another medical condition or are primary (i.e., attributable to neither a substance/medication nor
 another medical condition), a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder would be indicated.
 291
 If obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms occur exclusively during the
 course of delirium, they are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not
 diagnosed separately.