 Hoarding Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Persistent difficulty discarding or parting with possessions, regardless of their
 actual value.
 B. This difficulty is due to a perceived need to save the items and to distress
 associated with discarding them.
 C. The difficulty discarding possessions results in the accumulation of possessions
 that congest and clutter active living areas and substantially compromises their
 intended use. If living areas are uncluttered, it is only because of the
 interventions of third parties (e.g., family members, cleaners, authorities).
 D. The hoarding causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning (including maintaining a
 safe environment for self and others).
 E. The hoarding is not attributable to another medical condition (e.g., brain injury,
 cerebrovascular disease, Prader-Willi syndrome).
 F. The hoarding is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder
 (e.g., obsessions in obsessive-compulsive disorder, decreased energy in major
 depressive disorder, delusions in schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder,
 cognitive deficits in major neurocognitive disorder, restricted interests in autism
 spectrum disorder).
 Specify if:
 With excessive acquisition: If difficulty discarding possessions is accompanied
 by excessive acquisition of items that are not needed or for which there is no
 available space.
 Specify if:
 With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that hoarding-related
 beliefs and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding items, clutter, or
 excessive acquisition) are problematic.
 With poor insight: The individual is mostly convinced that hoarding-related
 beliefs and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding items, clutter, or
 excessive acquisition) are not problematic despite evidence to the contrary.
 With absent insight/delusional beliefs: The individual is completely convinced
 that hoarding-related beliefs and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding
 items, clutter, or excessive acquisition) are not problematic despite evidence to
 the contrary.
278
 Specifiers
 With excessive acquisition.
 Approximately 80%–90% of individuals with hoarding disorder
 display excessive acquisition. The most frequent form of acquisition is excessive buying,
 followed by acquisition of free items (e.g., leaflets, items discarded by others). Stealing is less
 common. Some individuals may deny excessive acquisition when first assessed, yet it may
 appear later during the course of treatment. Individuals with hoarding disorder typically
 experience distress if they are unable to or are prevented from acquiring items.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of hoarding disorder is persistent difficulty discarding or parting with
 possessions, regardless of their actual value (Criterion A). The term persistent indicates a long
standing difficulty rather than more transient life circumstances that may lead to excessive
 clutter, such as inheriting property. The difficulty in discarding possessions noted in Criterion A
 refers to any form of discarding, including throwing away, selling, giving away, or recycling.
 The main reasons given for this difficulty are the perceived utility or aesthetic value of the items
 or strong sentimental attachment to the possessions. Some individuals feel responsible for the
 fate of their possessions and often go to great lengths to avoid being wasteful. Fears of losing
 important information are also common. The most commonly saved items are newspapers,
 magazines, clothing, bags, books, mail, and papers, but virtually any item can be saved. The
 nature of items is not limited to possessions that most other people would define as useless or of
 limited value. Many individuals collect and save large numbers of valuable things as well, which
 are often found in piles mixed with other less valuable items.
 Individuals with hoarding disorder purposefully save possessions and experience distress
 (e.g., anxiety, frustration, regret, sadness, guilt) when facing the prospect of discarding them
 (Criterion B). This criterion emphasizes that the saving of possessions is intentional, which
 discriminates hoarding disorder from other forms of psychopathology that are characterized by
 the passive accumulation of items or the absence of distress when possessions are removed.
 Individuals accumulate large numbers of items that fill up and clutter active living areas to
 the extent that their intended use is no longer possible (Criterion C). For example, the individual
 may not be able to cook in the kitchen, sleep in his or her bed, or sit in a chair. If the space can
 be used, it is only with great difficulty. Clutter is defined as a large group of usually unrelated or
 marginally related objects piled together in a disorganized fashion in spaces designed for other
 purposes (e.g., tabletops, floor, hallway). Criterion C emphasizes the “active” living areas of the
 home, rather than more peripheral areas, such as garages, attics, or basements, that are sometimes
 cluttered in homes of individuals without hoarding disorder. However, individuals with hoarding
 disorder often have possessions that spill beyond the active living areas and can occupy and
 impair the use of other spaces, such as vehicles, yards, the workplace, and friends’ and relatives’
 houses. In some cases, living areas may be uncluttered only because of the intervention of third
 parties (e.g., family members, cleaners, local authorities). Individuals who have been forced to
 clear their homes still have a symptom picture that meets criteria for hoarding disorder because
the lack of clutter is attributable to a third-party intervention. Hoarding disorder contrasts with
 normative collecting behavior, which is organized and selective, although in some cases the
 actual amount of possessions may be similar to the amount accumulated by an individual with
 hoarding disorder. Normative collecting does not produce the clutter, distress, or impairment
 typical of hoarding disorder.
 Symptoms (i.e., difficulty discarding and/or clutter) must cause clinically significant distress
 or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning, including
 maintaining a safe environment for self and others (Criterion D). In some cases, particularly
 when there is poor insight, the individual may not report distress, and the
 279
 impairment may be apparent only to those around the individual. However, any attempts to
 discard or clear the possessions by third parties result in high levels of distress.
 Associated Features
 Other common features of hoarding disorder include indecisiveness, perfectionism, avoidance,
 procrastination, difficulty planning and organizing tasks, and distractibility. Some individuals
 with hoarding disorder live in unsanitary conditions that may be a logical consequence of
 severely cluttered spaces and/or that are related to planning and organizing difficulties. Animal
 hoarding can be defined as the accumulation of a large number of animals and a failure to
 provide minimal standards of nutrition, sanitation, and veterinary care, as well as failure to act on
 the deteriorating condition of the animals (including disease, starvation, or death) and the
 environment (e.g., severe overcrowding, extremely unsanitary conditions). Animal hoarding may
 be a special manifestation of hoarding disorder. Many individuals who hoard animals also hoard
 inanimate objects. The most prominent differences between animal and object hoarding are the
 extent of unsanitary conditions and the poorer insight in animal hoarding.
 Prevalence
 Nationally representative prevalence studies of hoarding disorder are not available. Community
 surveys estimate the point prevalence of clinically significant hoarding in the United States and
 Europe to range between 1.5% and 6%. In a meta-analysis of 12 studies across high-income
 countries, a prevalence of 2.5% was found, with no gender difference identified. This contrasts
 with clinical samples, which are predominantly women. In one population-based study in the
 Netherlands, hoarding symptoms appeared to be almost three times more prevalent in older
 adults (older than 65 years) compared with younger adults (ages 30–40 years).
 Development and Course
 Hoarding appears to begin early in life and spans well into the late stages. Hoarding symptoms
 may first emerge around ages 15–19 years, start interfering with the individual’s everyday
 functioning by the mid-20s, and cause clinically significant impairment by the mid-30s.
 Participants in clinical research studies are usually in their 50s. Thus, the severity of hoarding
 increases with each decade of life, especially after age 30. Once symptoms begin, the course of
 hoarding is often chronic, with few individuals reporting a waxing and waning course.
Pathological hoarding in children appears to be easily distinguished from developmentally
 adaptive saving and collecting behaviors. Because children and adolescents typically do not
 control their living environment and discarding behaviors, the possible intervention of third
 parties (e.g., parents keeping the spaces usable and thus reducing interference) should be
 considered when making the diagnosis.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Indecisiveness is a prominent feature of individuals with hoarding disorder and
 their first-degree relatives.
 Environmental.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Individuals with hoarding disorder often retrospectively report stressful and
 traumatic life events preceding the onset of the disorder or causing an exacerbation.
 Hoarding behavior is familial; more than 50% of individuals who hoard
 report having a relative who also hoards. Twin studies indicate that approximately 50% of the
 variability in hoarding behavior is attributable to additive genetic factors and the rest to
 nonshared environmental factors.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 280
 While most of the research has been done in Western, industrialized countries and urban
 communities, the available data from low- and middle-income countries suggest that hoarding
 has consistent clinical features cross-culturally, including similarities in severity at clinical
 presentation and associated cognitions and behaviors. In cultural contexts in which a high value
 is placed on thrift and storing of possessions, the presence of distress and functional impairment
 should be the basis for the diagnosis.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The key features of hoarding disorder (i.e., difficulty discarding, excessive amount of clutter) are
 generally comparable in men and women, but women tend to display more excessive acquisition,
 particularly excessive buying, than do men.
 Functional Consequences of Hoarding Disorder
 Clutter impairs basic activities, such as moving through the house, cooking, cleaning,
 maintaining personal hygiene, and even sleeping. Appliances may be broken, and utilities such
 as water and electricity may be disconnected, as access for repair work may be difficult. Quality
 of life is often considerably impaired. In severe cases, hoarding can put individuals at risk for
 fire, falling (especially elderly individuals), poor sanitation, and other health risks. Hoarding
 disorder is associated with occupational impairment, poor physical health, and high social
 service utilization. Family relationships are frequently under great strain. Conflict with neighbors
 and local authorities is common, and a substantial proportion of individuals with severe hoarding
 disorder have been involved in legal eviction proceedings, and some have a history of eviction.
 Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are judged to be a
 direct consequence of another medical condition (Criterion E), such as traumatic brain injury,
 surgical resection for treatment of a tumor or seizure control, cerebrovascular disease, infections
 of the central nervous system (e.g., herpes simplex encephalitis), or neurogenetic conditions such
 as Prader-Willi syndrome. Damage to the anterior ventromedial prefrontal and cingulate cortices
 has been particularly associated with the excessive accumulation of objects. In these individuals,
 the hoarding behavior is not present prior to the onset of the brain damage and appears shortly
 after the brain damage occurs. Some of these individuals appear to have little interest in the
 accumulated items and are able to discard them easily or do not care if others discard them,
 whereas others appear to be very reluctant to discard anything.
 Neurodevelopmental disorders.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects
 is judged to be a direct consequence of a neurodevelopmental disorder, such as autism spectrum
 disorder or intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the
 accumulation of objects is judged to be a direct consequence of delusions or negative symptoms
 in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Major depressive episode.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects is
 judged to be a direct consequence of psychomotor retardation, fatigue, or loss of energy during a
 major depressive episode.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are judged to
 be a direct consequence of typical obsessions or compulsions, such as fears of contamination,
 harm, or feelings of incompleteness in obsessive-compulsive disorder
 281
 (OCD). Feelings of incompleteness (e.g., losing one’s identity, or having to document and
 preserve all life experiences) are the most frequent OCD symptoms associated with this form of
 hoarding. The accumulation of objects can also be the result of persistently avoiding onerous
 rituals (e.g., not discarding objects in order to avoid endless washing or checking rituals).
 In OCD, the behavior is generally unwanted and highly distressing, and the individual
 experiences no pleasure or reward from it. Excessive acquisition is usually not present; if
 excessive acquisition is present, items are acquired because of a specific obsession (e.g., the need
 to buy items that have been accidentally touched in order to avoid contaminating other people),
 not because of a genuine desire to possess the items. Individuals who hoard in the context of
 OCD are also more likely to accumulate bizarre items, such as trash, feces, urine, fingernail and
 toenail cuttings, hair, used diapers, or rotten food. Accumulation of such items is very unusual in
 hoarding disorder.
 When severe hoarding appears concurrently with other typical symptoms of OCD but is
 judged to be independent from these symptoms, both hoarding disorder and OCD may be
 diagnosed.
 Neurocognitive disorders.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects is
 judged to be a direct consequence of a degenerative disorder, such as neurocognitive disorder
 associated with frontotemporal degeneration or Alzheimer’s disease. Typically, onset of the
 accumulating behavior is gradual and follows onset of the neurocognitive disorder. The
accumulating behavior may be accompanied by self-neglect and severe domestic squalor,
 alongside other neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as disinhibition, gambling, rituals/stereotypies,
 tics, and self-injurious behaviors.
 Comorbidity
 Approximately 75% of individuals with hoarding disorder have a comorbid mood or anxiety
 disorder. The most common comorbid conditions are major depressive disorder (30%–50%),
 social anxiety disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. Approximately 20% of individuals
 with hoarding disorder also have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for OCD. These
 comorbidities may often be the main reason for consultation, because individuals are unlikely to
 spontaneously report hoarding symptoms, and hoarding symptoms are often not asked about in
 routine clinical interviews.