 Diagnostic Criteria
 Kleptomania
 A. Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not needed for
 personal use or for their monetary value.
 B. Increasing sense of tension immediately before committing the theft.
 C. Pleasure, gratification, or relief at the time of committing the theft.
 F63.2
D. The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance and is not in
 response to a delusion or a hallucination.
 E. The stealing is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or
 antisocial personality disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of kleptomania is the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal items even
 though the items are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value (Criterion A). The
 individual experiences a rising subjective sense of tension before the theft (Criterion B) and feels
 pleasure, gratification, or relief when committing the theft (Criterion C). The stealing is not
 committed to express anger or vengeance, is not done in response to a delusion or hallucination
 (Criterion D), and is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial
 personality disorder (Criterion E). The objects are stolen despite the fact that they are typically of
 little value to the individual, who could have afforded to pay for them and often gives them away
 or discards them. Occasionally the individual may hoard the stolen objects or surreptitiously
 return them. Although individuals with this disorder will generally avoid stealing when
 immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a police officer), they usually do not preplan
 the thefts or fully take
 540
 into account the chances of apprehension. The stealing is done without assistance from, or
 collaboration with, others.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with kleptomania typically attempt to resist the impulse to steal, and they are aware
 that the act is wrong and senseless. The individual frequently fears being apprehended and often
 feels depressed or guilty about the thefts. Neurotransmitter pathways associated with behavioral
 addictions, including those associated with the serotonin, dopamine, and opioid systems, appear
 to play a role in kleptomania as well.
 Prevalence
 In the United States and Canada, kleptomania occurs in about 4%–24% of individuals arrested
 for shoplifting. Its prevalence in the U.S. general population is very rare, at approximately 0.3%
0.6%. Women outnumber men at a ratio of 3:1.
 Development and Course
 Age at onset of kleptomania is variable, but the disorder often begins in adolescence. However,
 the disorder may begin in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, and in rare cases in late
 adulthood. There is little systematic information on the course of kleptomania, but three typical
 courses have been described: sporadic with brief episodes and long periods of remission;
 episodic with protracted periods of stealing and periods of remission; and chronic with some
 degree of fluctuation. The disorder may continue for years, despite multiple convictions for
shoplifting.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 There appears to be a higher rate of alcohol use disorders in first-degree
 relatives of individuals with kleptomania than in the general population.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Kleptomania has been associated with an increased risk for suicide attempts.
 Functional Consequences of Kleptomania
 The disorder may cause legal, family, career, and personal difficulties.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Ordinary theft.
 Kleptomania should be distinguished from ordinary acts of theft or shoplifting.
 Ordinary theft (whether planned or impulsive) is deliberate and is motivated by the usefulness of
 the object or its monetary worth. Some persons, especially adolescents, may also steal on a dare,
 as an act of rebellion, or as a rite of passage. The diagnosis is not made unless other
 characteristic features of kleptomania are also present. Kleptomania is rare, whereas shoplifting
 is relatively common.
 Malingering.
 In malingering, individuals may simulate the symptoms of kleptomania to avoid
 criminal prosecution.
 Antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder.
 Antisocial personality disorder and conduct
 disorder are distinguished from kleptomania by a general pattern of antisocial behavior.
 Kleptomania 
Manic episodes, psychotic episodes, and major neurocognitive disorder.
 distinguished from intentional or inadvertent stealing that may occur during a
 541
 should 
be
 manic episode, in response to delusions or hallucinations (e.g., in schizophrenia), or as a result of
 a major neurocognitive disorder.
 Comorbidity
 Kleptomania may be associated with compulsive buying as well as with depressive and bipolar
 disorders (especially major depressive disorder), anxiety disorders, eating disorders (particularly
 bulimia nervosa), personality disorders, substance use disorders (especially alcohol use disorder),
 and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders.