Pyromania
 Diagnostic Criteria
 F63.1
 A. Deliberate and purposeful fire setting on more than one occasion.
 B. Tension or affective arousal before the act.
 C. Fascination with, interest in, curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational
 contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses, consequences).
 D. Pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting fires or when witnessing or
 participating in their aftermath.
 E. The fire setting is not done for monetary gain, as an expression of sociopolitical
 ideology, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or vengeance, to improve
 one’s living circumstances, in response to a delusion or hallucination, or as a
 result of impaired judgment (e.g., in major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual
 developmental disorder [intellectual disability], substance intoxication).
 F. The fire setting is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or
 antisocial personality disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of pyromania is the presence of multiple episodes of deliberate and
 purposeful fire setting (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder experience tension or
 affective arousal before setting a fire (Criterion B). There is a fascination with, interest in,
 538
 curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses,
consequences) (Criterion C). Individuals with this disorder are often regular “watchers” at fires
 in their neighborhoods, may set off false alarms, and derive pleasure from institutions,
 equipment, and personnel associated with fire. They may spend time at the local fire department,
 set fires to be affiliated with the fire department, or even become firefighters. Individuals with
 this disorder experience pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting the fire, witnessing its
 effects, or participating in its aftermath (Criterion D). The fire setting is not done for monetary
 gain, as an expression of sociopolitical ideology, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or
 vengeance, to improve one’s living circumstances, or in response to a delusion or a hallucination
 (Criterion E). The fire setting does not result from impaired judgment (e.g., in major
 neurocognitive disorder or intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability]). The
 diagnosis is not made if the fire setting is better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode,
 or antisocial personality disorder (Criterion F).
 Associated Features
 Individuals with pyromania may make considerable advance preparation for starting a fire. They
 may be indifferent to the consequences to life or property caused by the fire, or they may derive
 satisfaction from the resulting property destruction. The behaviors may lead to property damage,
 legal consequences, or injury or loss of life to the fire setter or to others. Individuals who
 impulsively set fires (who may or may not have pyromania) often have a current or past history
 of alcohol use disorder.
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of pyromania is not known. The lifetime prevalence of fire-setting
 behavior, which is just one component of pyromania and not sufficient for a diagnosis by itself,
 was reported as 1.0%–1.1% in a population sample. Fire-setting behavior occurs more often in
 men than in women (lifetime prevalence 1.7% vs. 0.4%); however, whether this also holds true
 for pyromania is unknown. The most common comorbidities of fire-setting behavior were
 antisocial personality disorder, substance use disorder, bipolar disorder, and gambling disorder.
 In contrast to fire setting, pyromania as a primary diagnosis appears to be very rare. Among a
 sample of persons in a Finnish hospital reaching the criminal system because of repeated fire
 setting, only 3.3% had symptoms that met full criteria for pyromania. In a U.S. study, 3.4% of a
 sample of adults hospitalized for psychiatric reasons had symptoms that met full criteria for
 current pyromania.
 Development and Course
 Although data are limited, some research suggests that late adolescence may be the typical age at
 onset of pyromania. The relationship between fire setting in childhood and pyromania in
 adulthood has not been documented. In individuals with pyromania, fire-setting incidents are
 episodic and may wax and wane in frequency. Longitudinal course is unknown. Although fire
 setting is a major problem in children and adolescents (over 40% of those arrested for arson
 offenses in the United States are younger than 18 years), pyromania in childhood appears to be
 rare. Juvenile fire setting is usually associated with conduct disorder, attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, or an adjustment disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 While fire setting is associated with antisocial behavior in men and women, they differ on some
 of the antisocial behaviors that accompany fire setting. Whether this holds for pyromania, which
 is a subset of those with fire setting, is unknown.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 A study of a consecutive sample of male fire setters who had a forensic assessment compared
 each case with four age-, sex-, and place of birth–matched controls and found that
 539
 fire setting was associated during follow-up with higher rates of suicide and also suicide attempt.
 Whether these differences apply to pyromania is unknown.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other causes of intentional fire setting.
 It is important to rule out other causes of fire setting before
 giving the diagnosis of pyromania. Intentional fire setting may occur for profit, sabotage, or
 revenge; to conceal a crime; to make a political statement (e.g., an act of terrorism or protest); or
 to attract attention or recognition (e.g., setting a fire in order to discover it and save the day). Fire
 setting may also occur as part of developmental experimentation in childhood (e.g., playing with
 matches, lighters, or fire).
 Other mental disorders.
 A separate diagnosis of pyromania is not given when fire setting occurs as
 part of conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial personality disorder, or if it occurs in
 response to a delusion or a hallucination (e.g., in schizophrenia) or is attributable to the
 physiological effects of another medical condition (e.g., epilepsy). The diagnosis of pyromania
 should also not be given when fire setting results from impaired judgment associated with major
 neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, or substance intoxication.
 Comorbidity
 There appears to be a high co-occurrence of substance use disorders, gambling disorder,
 depressive and bipolar disorders, and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders
 with pyromania.