 Intermittent Explosive Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control aggressive
 impulses as manifested by either of the following:
 1. Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights)
 or physical aggression toward property, animals, or other individuals,
 occurring twice weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months. The physical
 aggression does not result in damage or destruction of property and does not
 result in physical injury to animals or other individuals.
 2. Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction of property
 and/or physical assault involving physical injury against animals or other
 individuals occurring within a 12-month period.
 B. The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent outbursts is
 grossly out of proportion to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial
 stressors.
 C. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e., they are impulsive
 and/or anger-based) and are not committed to achieve some tangible objective
 (e.g., money, power, intimidation).
 D. The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress in the individual
 or impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or are associated with
 financial or legal consequences.
 E. Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent developmental level).
 F. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by another mental
 disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder, a psychotic disorder, antisocial personality disorder,
 borderline personality disorder) and are not attributable to another medical
 condition (e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer’s disease) or to the physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication). For children ages 6–18
 years, aggressive behavior that occurs as part of an adjustment disorder should
 not be considered for this diagnosis.
 Note: This diagnosis can be made in addition to the diagnosis of attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or
 autism spectrum disorder when recurrent impulsive aggressive outbursts are in
 excess of those usually seen in these disorders and warrant independent clinical
 attention.
 Diagnostic Features
 The impulsive (or anger-based) aggressive outbursts in intermittent explosive disorder have a
 rapid onset and, typically, little or no prodromal period. Outbursts typically last for less than 30
 minutes and commonly occur in response to a minor provocation by a close intimate or associate.
 Individuals with intermittent explosive disorder often have less severe episodes of verbal or
 nondamaging, nondestructive, or noninjurious physical assault (Criterion A1) in between more
 severe destructive/assaultive episodes (Criterion A2). Criterion A1 defines frequent (i.e., twice
 weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months) aggressive outbursts characterized by temper
 tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights, or assault without damage to objects or without
 injury to animals or other individuals. Criterion A2 defines infrequent (i.e., three in a 1-year
 period) impulsive aggressive outbursts characterized by damaging or destroying an object,
 regardless of its tangible value, or by
 528
 assaulting/striking or otherwise causing physical injury to an animal or to another individual.
 Regardless of the nature of the impulsive aggressive outburst, the core feature of intermittent
 explosive disorder is failure to control impulsive aggressive behavior in response to subjectively
 experienced provocation (i.e., psychosocial stressor) that would not typically result in an
 aggressive outburst (Criterion B). The aggressive outbursts are generally impulsive or anger
based rather than premeditated or instrumental (Criterion C) and cause significant distress or
 impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning or are associated with financial or legal
 consequences (Criterion D). A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be given to
 individuals younger than 6 years, or the equivalent developmental level (Criterion E), or to
 individuals whose aggressive outbursts are better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion
 F). A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be given to individuals with
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder or to individuals whose impulsive aggressive outbursts
 are attributable to another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance
 (Criterion F). In addition, children ages 6–18 years should not receive this diagnosis when
 impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder (Criterion F).
 Associated Features
 Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders are associated with
 intermittent explosive disorder, although onset of these disorders is typically later than that of
 intermittent explosive disorder.
Research provides neurobiological support for the presence of serotonergic abnormalities,
 globally and in the brain, specifically in areas of the limbic system (anterior cingulate) and
 orbitofrontal cortex in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder. Amygdala responses to
 anger stimuli, during functional magnetic resonance imaging scanning, are greater in individuals
 with intermittent explosive disorder compared with healthy persons. In addition, the volume of
 gray matter in several frontolimbic regions is reduced and correlates inversely with measures of
 aggression in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder, although these brain differences
 are not always seen.
 Prevalence
 The 1-year prevalence for intermittent explosive disorder in the United States is about 2.6%, with
 a lifetime prevalence of 4.0%. Higher 1-year prevalences of 3.9% and 6.9% (narrow definition)
 are present among African Americans and Caribbean Black adolescents, respectively, in the
 United States, especially among males. This is consistent with higher 12-month rates of
 psychiatric disorder among immigrant Caribbean Black men and their second- and third
generation offspring, possibly associated with downward social mobility and the effects of
 racism. However, the reported prevalence of conduct disorder or other disruptive disorders may
 be affected by misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of individuals from some cultural backgrounds.
 Intermittent explosive disorder is more prevalent among younger individuals (e.g., younger than
 35–40 years), compared with individuals older than 50 years, and individuals with a high school
 education or less. In some studies, the prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder is greater in
 men and boys than in women and girls; other studies have found no sex or gender differences.
 Development and Course
 The onset of recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive behavior is most common in late
 childhood or adolescence and rarely begins for the first time after age 40 years. The course of the
 disorder may be episodic, with recurrent periods of impulsive aggressive outbursts. Intermittent
 explosive disorder appears to follow a chronic and persistent course over many years. It also
 appears to be quite common regardless of the presence or absence of
 529
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or other disruptive, impulse-control, and
 conduct disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder).
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Individuals with a history of physical and emotional trauma during the first 20
 years of life are at increased risk for intermittent explosive disorder. Long-term displacement
 from home and separation from family members are risk factors in some refugee population
 settings.
 Genetic and physiological.
 First-degree relatives of individuals with intermittent explosive
 disorder are at increased risk for intermittent explosive disorder, and twin studies have
 demonstrated a substantial genetic influence for impulsive aggression.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The lower prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder in some regions (Asia, Middle East) or
 countries (Romania, Nigeria), compared with the United States, suggests that information about
 recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive behaviors either is not elicited on questioning or is
 less likely to be present, because of cultural factors.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 A study of 1,460 research volunteers found that intermittent explosive disorder comorbid with
 posttraumatic stress disorder was associated with a markedly elevated rate of lifetime suicide
 attempt (41%). Posttraumatic stress disorder and intermittent explosive disorder were the only
 disorders associated with suicide attempt among soldiers with suicidal ideation, although the role
 of intermittent explosive disorder was less clear in multivariate analyses.
 Functional Consequences of Intermittent Explosive Disorder
 Social (e.g., loss of friends, relatives, marital instability), occupational (e.g., demotion, loss of
 employment), financial (e.g., because of value of objects destroyed), and legal (e.g., civil suits as
 a result of aggressive behavior against person or property; criminal charges for assault) problems
 often develop as a result of intermittent explosive disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when Criteria A1 and/or A2
 are only met during an episode of another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder,
 bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder), or when impulsive aggressive outbursts are attributable to
 another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance or medication. This
 diagnosis also should not be made, particularly in children and adolescents ages 6–18 years,
 when the impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 In contrast to intermittent explosive disorder, disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by a persistently negative mood state (i.e.,
 irritability, anger) most of the day, nearly every day, between impulsive aggressive outbursts. A
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder can only be given when the onset of
 recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive outbursts is before age 10 years. Finally, a diagnosis
 of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not be made for the first time after age 18
 years. Otherwise, these diagnoses are mutually exclusive.
 Antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder.
 Individuals 
with 
personality disorder or borderline personality disorder often display recurrent,
 530
 antisocial
 problematic impulsive aggressive outbursts. However, the level of impulsive aggression in
 individuals with antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder is lower than
 that in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder.
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and personality change due to another medical
 condition, aggressive type.
 Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or
 autism spectrum disorder.
 A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when aggressive outbursts are
 judged to result from the physiological effects of another diagnosable medical condition (e.g.,
 brain injury associated with a change in personality characterized by aggressive outbursts;
 complex partial epilepsy). Nonspecific abnormalities on neurological examination (e.g., “soft
 signs”) and nonspecific electroencephalographic changes are compatible with a diagnosis of
 intermittent explosive disorder unless there is a diagnosable medical condition that better
 explains the impulsive aggressive outbursts.
 A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder
 should not be made when impulsive aggressive outbursts are nearly always associated with
 intoxication with or withdrawal from substances (e.g., alcohol, phencyclidine, cocaine and other
 stimulants, barbiturates, inhalants). However, when a sufficient number of impulsive aggressive
 outbursts also occur in the absence of substance intoxication or withdrawal, and these warrant
 independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
 Individuals with any of these childhood-onset disorders may exhibit impulsive aggressive
 outbursts. Individuals with ADHD are typically impulsive and, as a result, may also exhibit
 impulsive aggressive outbursts. While individuals with conduct disorder can exhibit impulsive
 aggressive outbursts, the form of aggression characterized by the diagnostic criteria is proactive
 and predatory. Aggression in oppositional defiant disorder is typically characterized by temper
 tantrums and verbal arguments with authority figures, whereas impulsive aggressive outbursts in
 intermittent explosive disorder are in response to a broader array of provocation and include
 physical assault. The level of impulsive aggression in individuals with a history of one or more
 of these disorders has been reported as lower than that in comparable individuals whose
 symptoms also meet intermittent explosive disorder Criteria A through E. Accordingly, if
 Criteria A through E are also met, and the impulsive aggressive outbursts warrant independent
 clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
 Comorbidity
 Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, bulimia nervosa, binge
eating disorder, and substance use disorders are most commonly comorbid with intermittent
 explosive disorder in community samples. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality
 disorder or borderline personality disorder, and individuals with a history of disorders with
 disruptive behaviors (e.g., ADHD, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder), are at greater
 risk for comorbid intermittent explosive disorder.