Differential Diagnosis
 Normal variations in academic attainment.
 Specific learning disorder is distinguished from normal
 variations in academic attainment attributable to external factors (e.g., lack of educational
 opportunity, consistently poor instruction, learning in a second language), because the learning
 difficulties persist in the presence of adequate educational opportunity and exposure to the same
 instruction as the peer group, and competency in the language of instruction, even when it is
 different from one’s primary spoken language.
 Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 Specific learning disorder differs from
 general learning difficulties associated with intellectual developmental disorder, because the
 learning difficulties occur in the presence of normal levels of intellectual functioning (i.e., IQ
 score of at least 70 ± 5). If intellectual developmental disorder is present, specific learning
 disorder can be diagnosed only when the learning difficulties are in excess of those usually
 associated with the intellectual developmental disorder.
 Learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders.
 Specific 
learning 
distinguished from learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders
 85
 disorder 
is
 (e.g., pediatric stroke, traumatic brain injury, hearing impairment, vision impairment), because in
 these cases there are abnormal findings on neurological examination.
 Neurocognitive disorders.
 Specific learning disorder is distinguished from learning problems
 associated with neurodegenerative cognitive disorders. In specific learning disorder, the clinical
 expression of specific learning difficulties occurs during the developmental period, which
 sometimes only becomes evident when learning demands have increased and exceed the
 individual’s limited capacities (as may occur in adulthood), and the difficulties do not manifest
 as a marked decline from a former state.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the poor
 academic performance associated with ADHD, because in the latter condition the problems may
 not necessarily reflect specific difficulties in learning academic skills but rather may reflect
 difficulties in performing those skills. However, the co-occurrence of specific learning disorder
Psychotic disorders.
 F82
 and ADHD is more frequent than expected by chance. If criteria for both disorders are met, both
 diagnoses can be given.
 Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the cognitive-processing
 difficulties associated with schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, because with these
 disorders there is a decline (often rapid) in these functional domains. However, deficits in
 reading ability are more severe in specific learning disorder than what would be predicted by the
 general cognitive impairments associated with schizophrenia. If criteria for both disorders are
 met, both diagnoses can be given.