 Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Persistently or recurrently deficient (or absent) sexual/erotic thoughts or
 fantasies and desire for sexual activity. The judgment of deficiency is made by
the clinician, taking into account factors that affect sexual functioning, such as
 age and general and sociocultural contexts of the individual’s life.
 B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
 approximately 6 months.
 C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
 D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
 as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
 and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
 medical condition.
 Specify whether:
 Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
 sexually active.
 Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
 function.
 499
 Specify whether:
 Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
 Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
 Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
 Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
 A.
 Diagnostic Features
 When an assessment for male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is being made, interpersonal
 context must be taken into account. A “desire discrepancy,” in which a man has lower desire for
 sexual activity than his partner, is not sufficient to diagnose male hypoactive sexual desire
 disorder. Both low/absent desire for sex and deficient/absent sexual thoughts or fantasies
 (Criterion A) are required for a diagnosis of the disorder. There may be variation across men in
 how sexual desire is expressed.
 The lack of desire for sex and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or fantasies must be persistent
 or recurrent and must occur for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months. The inclusion of
 this duration criterion is meant to safeguard against making a diagnosis in cases in which a man’s
 low sexual desire may represent a reactive but temporary response to adverse life conditions. For
 example, the man’s low sexual desire may be related to an acute stressor or loss of self-esteem
 (e.g., being fired from a job or experiencing financial difficulty such as business failure). If these
 stressors persist beyond 6 months along with low sexual desire, then clinician judgment
 determines the appropriateness of the male hypoactive sexual desire disorder diagnosis.
Associated Features
 Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is sometimes associated with erectile and/or ejaculatory
 concerns. For example, persistent difficulties obtaining an erection may lead a man to lose
 interest in sexual activity. Men with hypoactive sexual desire disorder often report that they no
 longer initiate sexual activity and that they are minimally receptive to a partner’s attempt to
 initiate. Sexual activities (e.g., masturbation or partnered sexual activity) may sometimes occur
 even in the presence of low sexual desire. Relationship-specific preferences regarding patterns of
 sexual initiation must be taken into account when making a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual
 desire disorder. Although men are more likely to initiate sexual activity, and thus low desire may
 be characterized by a pattern of noninitiation, many men may prefer to have their partner initiate
 sexual activity. In such situations, the man’s lack of receptivity to a partner’s initiation should be
 considered when evaluating low desire.
 In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following
 five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual
 desire disorder given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors
 (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor
 communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors
 (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g.,
 depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g.,
 inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5)
 medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may contribute
 differently to the presenting symptoms of different men with this disorder.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder varies depending on country of origin
 and method of assessment. Estimates of prevalence in representative samples range
 500
 from 3% to 17%. Sexual desire problems are less common in younger men (ages 16–24), with
 prevalence rates between 3% and 14%, compared with older men (ages 60–74 years), with
 prevalence rates between 16% and 28%. However, a persistent lack of interest in sex, lasting 6
 months or more, affects a smaller proportion of men (6%). Moreover, less than 2% of men report
 clinically significant distress associated with low desire. Studies on help-seeking behavior
 indicate that only 10.5% of men with sexual problems in the previous year sought help.
 Development and Course
 By definition, lifelong male hypoactive sexual desire disorder indicates that low or no sexual
 desire has always been present, whereas the acquired subtype would be assigned if the man’s low
 desire developed after a period of normal sexual desire. There is a requirement that low desire
 persist for approximately 6 months or more; thus, short-term changes in sexual desire should not
 be diagnosed as male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
 There is a normative age-related decline in sexual desire. The prevalence of low sexual desire
 in men increases with age, from approximately 5.2% prevalence at age 27 years to 18.5% at age
50 years. Like women, men identify a variety of triggers for their sexual desire, and they
 describe a wide range of reasons that they choose to engage in sexual activity. Although erotic
 visual cues may be more potent elicitors of desire in younger men, the potency of sexual cues
 may decrease with age and must be considered when evaluating men for hypoactive sexual
 desire disorder.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Mood and anxiety symptoms appear to be strong predictors of low desire in men.
 Up to half of men with a past history of psychiatric symptoms may have moderate or severe loss
 of desire, compared with only 15% of those without such a history. A man’s feelings about
 himself, his perception of his partner’s sexual desire toward him, feelings of being emotionally
 connected, and contextual variables may all negatively (as well as positively) affect sexual
 desire.
 Beliefs about sexuality (particularly restrictive sexual attitudes and conservative beliefs) are
 commonly associated with low sexual desire in men. Moreover, lack of erotic thoughts and
 concerns about erection during sexual activity are significant predictors of low sexual desire, as
 well as low confidence levels in erectile function.
 Environmental.
 Alcohol use may increase the occurrence of low desire. Other environmental
 determinants of low sexual desire include problematic dyadic relationships, reduced attraction
 toward the partner, living in a long-term relationship, sexual boredom, and professional stress. At
 the larger societal level, cohort studies in a few high-income countries indicate a trend toward the
 decrease of sexual desire in men in recent decades.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Endocrine disorders such as hyperprolactinemia and hypogonadism
 significantly affect sexual desire in men. Age is a significant risk factor for low desire in men. It
 is unclear whether or not men with low desire also have abnormally low levels of testosterone;
 however, among hypogonadal men, low desire is common. There also may be a critical threshold
 below which testosterone will affect sexual desire in men and above which there is little effect of
 testosterone on men’s desire.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There is marked variability in prevalence rates of low desire across world regions, ranging from
 12.5% in Northern European men to 28% in Southeast Asian men ages 40–80 years. Distress
 about lack of sexual desire was significantly associated with sociocultural contexts (e.g.,
 occupational stress) in a web-based survey across three European countries (Portugal, Croatia,
 and Norway).
 501
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In contrast to the classification of sexual dysfunctions in women, desire and arousal disorders
 have been retained as separate constructs in men. Despite some similarities in the experience of
 desire across men and women, and the fact that desire fluctuates over time and is dependent on
 contextual factors, men do report a significantly higher intensity and frequency of sexual desire
Nonsexual mental disorders.
 Substance/medication use.
 Another medical condition.
 Interpersonal factors.
 Other sexual dysfunctions.
 F52.4
 compared with women. However, preliminary data suggest that the overlap between sexual
 desire and sexual arousal (erectile function) is also very common in men, particularly when they
 present for help regarding sexual problems. Regarding sexual orientation, data suggest that low
 sexual desire is more commonly reported by gay men (19%) than by heterosexual men (9%).
 Differential Diagnosis
 Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder,
 which is characterized by “markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
 activities,” may explain the lack of sexual desire. If the lack of desire is better explained by
 another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be
 made.
 An onset of male hypoactive sexual desire that coincides with the
 beginning of substance/medication use and that dissipates with discontinuation of the
 substance/medication or dose reduction is suggestive of a substance/medication-induced sexual
 dysfunction, which should be diagnosed instead of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
 If the low/absent desire and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or
 fantasies are better explained by the effects of another medical condition (e.g., hypogonadism,
 diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, central nervous system disease), then a diagnosis of male
 hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.
 If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship
 distress or other significant stressors, are associated with the loss of desire in the man, then a
 diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.
 The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a
 diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder; there is some evidence that up to one-half of
 men with low sexual desire also have erectile difficulties, and slightly fewer may also have early
 ejaculation difficulties. If the man’s low desire is explained by self-identification as an asexual,
 then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is not made.
 Comorbidity
 Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is rarely the sole sexual diagnosis in men. Erectile
 dysfunction, delayed ejaculation, and premature (early) ejaculation are often comorbid
 diagnoses. Depression and other mental disorders, as well as endocrinological factors, are often
 comorbid with male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.