Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent or recurrent difficulties with one (or more) of the following:
 1. Vaginal penetration during intercourse.
 2. Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain during vaginal intercourse or penetration
 attempts.
 3. Marked fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain in anticipation of,
 during, or as a result of vaginal penetration.
 4. Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted
 vaginal penetration.
 B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
 approximately 6 months.
 C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
 D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
 as a consequence of a severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or
 other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a
 substance/medication or another medical condition.
 494
 Specify whether:
 Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
 sexually active.
 Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
 function.
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
 Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
 Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
 A.
 Diagnostic Features
 Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder refers to four commonly comorbid symptom dimensions:
 1) difficulty having intercourse, 2) genito-pelvic pain, 3) fear of pain or vaginal penetration, and
 4) tension of the pelvic floor muscles (Criterion A). Because major difficulty in any one of these
 symptom dimensions is often sufficient to cause clinically significant distress, a diagnosis can be
 made on the basis of marked difficulty in only one symptom dimension. However, all four
 symptom dimensions should be assessed even if a diagnosis can be made on the basis of only
 one symptom dimension.
 Marked difficulty having vaginal intercourse/penetration (Criterion A1) can vary from a total
 inability to experience vaginal penetration in any situation (e.g., intercourse, gynecological
 examinations, tampon insertion) to the ability to easily experience penetration in one situation
 but not in another. Although the most common clinical situation is when a female is unable to
experience intercourse or penetration with a partner, difficulties in undergoing required
 gynecological examinations may also be present. Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain during
 vaginal intercourse or penetration attempts (Criterion A2) refers to pain occurring in different
 locations in the genito-pelvic area. Location of pain as well as intensity should be assessed.
 Typically, pain can be characterized as superficial (vulvovaginal or occurring during penetration)
 or deep (pelvic; i.e., not felt until deeper penetration). The intensity of the pain is often not
 linearly related to distress or interference with vaginal penetration or other sexual activities.
 Some genito-pelvic pain only occurs when provoked (i.e., by intercourse or mechanical
 stimulation); other genito-pelvic pain may be spontaneous as well as provoked. Genito-pelvic
 pain can also be usefully characterized qualitatively (e.g., “burning,” “cutting,” “shooting,”
 “throbbing”). The pain may persist for a period after intercourse is completed and may also occur
 during urination. Typically, the pain experienced during vaginal intercourse can be reproduced
 during a gynecological examination.
 Marked fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain either in anticipation of, or during,
 or as a result of vaginal penetration (Criterion A3) is commonly reported by females who have
 regularly experienced pain during vaginal penetration. This “normal” reaction may lead to
 avoidance of sexual/intimate situations. In other cases, this marked fear does not appear to be
 closely related to the experience of pain but nonetheless leads to avoidance of intercourse and
 vaginal penetration situations. Some have described this as similar to a phobic reaction except
 that the phobic object may be vaginal penetration or the fear of pain.
 Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal
 penetration (Criterion A4) can vary from reflexive-like spasm of the pelvic floor in response to
 attempted vaginal entry to “normal/voluntary” muscle guarding in response to the anticipated or
 the repeated experience of pain or to fear or anxiety. In the case of “normal/guarding” reactions,
 penetration may be possible under circumstances of relaxation. The characterization and
 assessment of pelvic floor dysfunction is often best undertaken by a specialist gynecologist or by
 a pelvic floor physical therapist.
 Symptoms of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder may be characterized by previous
 terms, including dyspareunia (pain during sexual intercourse) and vaginismus (defined by
 495
 involuntary contraction of muscles making penetration painful or impossible). Specific
 medical disorders, such as vulvodynia (chronic idiopathic vulvar pain lasting at least 3 months)
 and provoked vestibulodynia (contact-induced vulvodynia localized to the vulvar vestibule), may
 be a primary cause of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and may be a focus in studies of the
 disorder. Females diagnosed with these other conditions report significant distress, and their
 symptoms are likely to meet criteria for genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
 Associated Features
 Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is frequently associated with other sexual dysfunctions,
 particularly reduced sexual desire and interest (female sexual interest/arousal disorder).
 Sometimes desire and interest are preserved in sexual situations that are not painful or do not
 require penetration. Even when individuals with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder report
sexual interest/motivation, there is often behavioral avoidance of sexual situations and
 opportunities. Avoidance of gynecological examinations despite medical recommendations is
 also frequent. The pattern of avoidance is similar to that seen in phobic disorders. It is common
 for females who have not succeeded in having vaginal penetration to come for treatment only
 when they wish to conceive. Many females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder will
 experience associated relationship/marital problems; they also often report that the symptoms
 significantly diminish their feelings of femininity.
 In addition to the subtype “lifelong/acquired,” five factors should be considered during
 assessment and diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder because they may be
 relevant to etiology or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s
 health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., partner responses to the pain, including solicitous,
 negative, and facilitative responses; discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual
 vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric
 comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4)
 cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes
 toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of
 these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different females with this
 disorder.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is unknown. However, approximately
 10%–28% of females of reproductive age in the United States report recurrent pain during
 intercourse. Difficulties having intercourse appear to be a frequent referral to sexual dysfunction
 clinics and to specialist clinicians. Internationally, prevalence of genito-pelvic pain upon
 intercourse ranges from 8% to 28% among females of reproductive age and varies by country.
 Prevalence of genito-pelvic pain during sexual activities involving vaginal penetration among
 lesbian women relative to heterosexual women remains uncertain but may be similar or lower.
 Prevalence rates among other sexual minorities, including transgender women, are unknown.
 Development and Course
 The development and course of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is unclear. Because
 women generally do not seek treatment until they experience problems in sexual functioning, it
 can, in general, be difficult to characterize genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder as lifelong
 (primary) or acquired (secondary). Although women typically come to clinical attention after the
 initiation of sexual activity, there are often earlier clinical signs. For example, difficulty with or
 the avoidance of use of tampons is an important predictor of later
 496
 problems. Difficulties with vaginal penetration (inability or fear or pain) may not be obvious
 until intercourse is attempted during sexual activity. Even once intercourse is attempted, the
 frequency of attempts may not be significant or regular. In cases where it is difficult to establish
 whether symptomatology is lifelong or acquired, it is useful to determine the presence of any
 consistent period of successful pain-, fear-, and tension-free intercourse. If the experience of such
a period can be established, then genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder can be characterized as
 acquired. Once symptomatology is present for a period of approximately 6 months, the
 probability of spontaneous and significant symptomatic remission appears to diminish.
 Complaints related to genito-pelvic pain peak during early adulthood and in the peri- and
 postmenopausal period. There may also be an increase in genito-pelvic pain–related symptoms in
 the postpartum period.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Females with antecedent mood and anxiety disorders are four times more likely
 to develop symptoms of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder compared with those without
 these antecedent disorders. Psychosocial factors (e.g., pain catastrophizing, pain self-efficacy,
 avoidance of pain, negative mood) and interpersonal factors (e.g., insecure attachment, negative
 partner responses to the pain, sexual motives that focus on avoiding negative relationship
 outcomes) may exacerbate and maintain symptoms.
 Environmental.
 Females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder are more likely to report a
 history of sexual and/or physical abuse, and fear of abuse than females without this disorder,
 although not all women with presenting symptoms have this history.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Females experiencing superficial pain during vaginal penetration often
 report the onset of the pain after a history of vaginal infections. Even after the infections have
 resolved and there are no known residual physical findings, the pain persists. Pain during tampon
 insertion or the inability to insert tampons before any sexual contact has been attempted is an
 important risk factor for genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
 Additional biomedical risk factors include early puberty, inflammation, early use of oral
 contraceptives, vulvar pain receptor proliferation (i.e., increase in the number of receptors) and
 sensitization (i.e., touch may become perceived as pain), and lower touch and pain thresholds.
 Abnormalities of the pelvic floor muscles while at rest, including hypertonicity, poor muscle
 control, hypersensitivity, and altered contractility, may close the vaginal hiatus and interfere with
 penetration.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Cultural contexts can affect the experience and reporting of genito-pelvic pain related to
 intercourse. Affected females experience negative implications related to social narratives of
 womanhood, sexuality, and femininity, including pressures to prioritize men’s sexual desire and
 penetrative sex, and depictions of sex as easy and natural. Cultural views that devalue female
 sexual experience may affect the way women interpret the experience of pain during sex, their
 help-seeking choices, and how they discuss their symptoms with their caregivers. For example,
 some females may not report genito-pelvic pain specifically but rather refer to being unhappy in
 their marriages.
 In the United States, Hispanic females endorse significantly higher rates of genito-pelvic pain
 and are more likely to report pain with first intercourse (i.e., primary genito-pelvic
 pain/penetration disorder) compared with non-Hispanic women. In a Minneapolis, Minnesota
 survey, only about half of females with genito-pelvic pain sought treatment, and those who did
 frequently reported feeling stigmatized. Such experiences may be heightened for
497
 sexual minorities and underserved ethnic and racialized groups, especially given evidence of
 inequities in pain treatment for females and African Americans.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Gendered social constructions relating to womanhood and femininity are implicated in the
 experience of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, including the prioritization of both
 penetrative sex and men’s sexual desires above women’s own needs and desires. The disorder is
 associated with feelings of shame and inadequacy as a female, contributing further to enhanced
 psychological distress.
 By definition, the diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is only given to
 females. There is relatively new research concerning urological chronic pelvic pain syndrome in
 males, suggesting that males may experience some similar problems. The prevalence of male
 genito-pelvic pain is estimated to be 2.2%–9.7% worldwide. The research and clinical experience
 are not sufficiently developed yet to justify the application of this diagnosis to males. Other
 specified sexual dysfunction or unspecified sexual dysfunction may be diagnosed in males
 appearing to fit this pattern.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Validated physiological measures of Criterion A2 symptoms (Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic
 pain during vaginal intercourse or penetration attempts) can be assessed in real time (e.g., the
 cotton-swab test, vulvalgesiometer, tampon test). Although these measures are well validated for
 pain intensity during penetration attempts, none approximate the sexual context in which the pain
 is experienced, which can only be assessed via self-report. Criterion A4 symptoms (Marked
 tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal penetration) can also
 be measured (e.g., via electromyographic amplitude, dynamometer, 4D ultrasound by a qualified
 physical therapist). There are no validated physiological measures of component symptoms for
 Criterion A1 or A3. Validated psychometric inventories may be used to formally assess the pain
 and anxiety components related to genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
 Functional Consequences of Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
 Functional difficulties in genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder are often associated with
 interference in various aspects of the romantic relationship—including the initiation of such
 relationships—and sometimes with the ability to conceive via penile/vaginal intercourse.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Another medical condition.
 In many instances, females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration
 disorder will also be diagnosed with another medical condition (e.g., lichen sclerosus,
 endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, genitourinary syndrome of menopause). In some
 cases, treating the medical condition may alleviate the genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
 Much of the time, this is not the case. There are no reliable tools or diagnostic methods to allow
 clinicians to know whether the medical condition or genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is
Somatic symptom and related disorders.
 Inadequate sexual stimuli.
 F52.0
 primary. Often, the associated medical conditions are difficult to diagnose and treat. For
 example, the increased incidence of postmenopausal pain during intercourse may sometimes be
 attributable to vaginal dryness or irritation associated with declining estrogen levels. The
 relationship, however, between genital symptoms, estrogen, and pain is not well understood.
 498
 Some females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
 may also be diagnosable with somatic symptom disorder. Since both genito-pelvic
 pain/penetration disorder and the somatic symptom and related disorders are new diagnoses in
 DSM-5, it is not yet clear whether they can be reliably differentiated. Some females diagnosed
 with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder will also be diagnosed with a specific phobia.
 It is important that the clinician, in considering differential diagnoses,
 assess the adequacy of sexual stimuli within the female’s sexual experience. Sexual situations in
 which there is inadequate foreplay or arousal may lead to difficulties in penetration, pain, or
 avoidance. Erectile dysfunction or premature (early) ejaculation in the male partner may result in
 difficulties with penetration. These conditions should be carefully assessed. In some situations, a
 diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder may not be appropriate.
 Comorbidity
 Comorbidity between genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and other sexual difficulties
 appears to be common. Comorbidity with relationship distress is also common and typically
 related to the lack of sexual intimacy rather than (solely) the pain itself. This is not surprising,
 because the inability to have (pain-free) intercourse with a desired partner and the avoidance of
 sexual opportunities may be either a contributing factor to or the result of other sexual or
 relationship problems. Because pelvic floor symptoms are implicated in the diagnosis of genito
pelvic pain/penetration disorder, there is likely to be a higher prevalence of other disorders
 related to the pelvic floor or reproductive organs (e.g., interstitial cystitis, constipation, vaginal
 infection, endometriosis, irritable bowel syndrome). Females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration
 disorder frequently experience comorbid chronic pain conditions (e.g., fibromyalgia, chronic
 headaches), and the prevalence of these comorbidities increases with the severity of vulvar pain
 symptoms.
 Lesbian women also report genito-pelvic pain and penetration difficulties during sexual
 activities; the frequency of genito-pelvic pain/penetration symptoms among nonheterosexual
 women has been shown to be less than or the same as among heterosexual women.