Delayed Ejaculation
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Either of the following symptoms must be experienced on almost all or all
 occasions (approximately 75%–100%) of partnered sexual activity (in identified
 situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts), and without the individual
 desiring delay:
1. Marked delay in ejaculation.
 2. Marked infrequency or absence of ejaculation.
 B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
 approximately 6 months.
 C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
 D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
 as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
 and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
 medical condition.
 Specify whether:
 Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
 sexually active.
 Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
 function.
 479
 Specify whether:
 Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
 Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
 Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
 Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
 A.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of delayed ejaculation is a marked delay in or inability to achieve
 ejaculation or marked infrequency of ejaculation on all or almost all occasions of partnered
 sexual activity, despite the presence of adequate sexual stimulation and the desire to ejaculate
 (Criterion A). In order to qualify for a DSM-5 diagnosis of delayed ejaculation, the symptoms
 must have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months (Criterion B) and must
 cause clinically significant distress in the individual (Criterion C). The partnered sexual activity
 may include manual, oral, coital, or anal stimulation. In most cases, the diagnosis will be made
 by self-report, although for men in heterosexual partnered relationships, it is frequently the
 female partner’s distress that motivates treatment seeking. It is common for men who present
 with delayed ejaculation to be able to ejaculate with self-stimulation, but not during partnered
 sexual activity.
 The definition of “delay” does not have precise boundaries, as there is no consensus as to
 what constitutes a reasonable time to reach orgasm or what is unacceptably long for most men
 and their sexual partners. Although the definitions of delayed ejaculation apply equally well to
both heterosexual and homosexual orientation, the vast majority of the research focus has been
 based on the concept of intravaginal latency, and therefore male-female intercourse. The findings
 from those studies document that the majority of men’s intravaginal ejaculatory latency time
 (IELT) range is approximately 4–10 minutes. There is also no clear diagnostic delineation
 between delayed ejaculation as a sexual dysfunction and delay that is a consequence of normal
 aging. Therefore, the diagnosis of delayed ejaculation is based on clinical judgment, taking into
 consideration the individual’s psychosexual and medical history, age, relationship context, and
 sexual stimulation patterns and behaviors. The diagnosis of delayed ejaculation should not be
 given if the clinician judges that the individual’s dissatisfaction is entirely attributable to
 unrealistic expectations.
 Associated Features
 The man and his partner may report prolonged thrusting to achieve orgasm to the point of
 exhaustion or genital discomfort and sometimes even injury to himself and/or his partner before
 finally ceasing. Some males may report avoiding sexual activity because of a repetitive pattern of
 difficulty ejaculating.
 Delayed ejaculation is associated with highly frequent masturbation, use of masturbation
 techniques not easily duplicated by a partner, and marked disparities between sexual fantasies
 during masturbation and the reality of sex with a partner.
 Males with delayed ejaculation typically report less coital activity, higher levels of
 relationship distress, sexual dissatisfaction, lower subjective arousal, anxiety about their sexual
 performance, and general health issues than sexually functional men.
 In addition to considerations of applicable subtypes (i.e., whether the ejaculatory delay has
 been present since the individual became sexually active or began after a period of relatively
 normal sexual function, and whether the ejaculatory delay is generalized or occurs only with
 certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners), the following factors are important to
 consider in the assessment of delayed ejaculation: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual
 problems or health); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies
 480
 in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., hypoactive sexual
 desire), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors such as job loss or stress;
 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity;
 attitudes toward sexuality); 5) medical factors, particularly hypogonadism or neurological
 disorders (e.g., multiple sclerosis, diabetic neuropathy); and 6) use of substances or medications
 that might inhibit ejaculation (e.g., use of serotonergic drugs).
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of delayed ejaculation in the United States is estimated at 1%–5% but has ranged
 as high as 11% in international studies. However, variation in syndrome definitions across
 studies may have contributed to differences in the prevalence of the DSM-5 disorder.
 Development and Course
Lifelong delayed ejaculation begins with early sexual experiences and continues throughout the
 course of an individual’s life. Acquired delayed ejaculation begins after a period of normal
 sexual function. A number of biomedical, psychosocial, and cultural factors can contribute to the
 predisposition to or maintenance of lifelong or acquired delayed ejaculation (see the section
 “Risk and Prognostic Factors”), and either subtype can be generalized or situational in nature.
 The prevalence of delayed ejaculation increases with age. As males age, they are more likely
 to have progressively more of the following changes in ejaculatory function, including, but not
 limited to, reduced ejaculatory volume, force, and sensation, and increased “refractory time.”
 Refractory latency increases for males secondary to surgical, medical, and pharmaceutical
 complications, as well as aging.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Ejaculatory latency is an end point consequence that is determined by a range of factors. A large
 number of psychosocial factors increase the probability of an individual experiencing delayed
 ejaculation, with depression and relationship dissatisfaction being predominant contributors.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Numerous medical conditions may lead to delayed ejaculation,
 including procedures that disrupt sympathetic or somatic innervation to the genital region such as
 radical prostatectomy for cancer treatment. Neurological and endocrine disorders, including
 spinal cord injury, stroke, multiple sclerosis, pelvic-region surgery, severe diabetes, epilepsy,
 hormonal abnormalities, and sleep apnea, as well as alcohol abuse, bowel dysfunction, cannabis
 use, and environmental factors, may be associated with delayed ejaculation.
 Additionally, medications that inhibit α-adrenergic innervation of the ejaculatory system
 (e.g., tamsulosin) are associated with delayed ejaculation, as well as antihypertensive agents,
 antidepressants (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), and antipsychotic drugs.
 Age-related loss of the fast-conducting peripheral sensory nerves and age-related decreased
 sex steroid secretion may be associated with an increase in delayed ejaculation in males as they
 age. Reduced androgen levels with age may also be associated with delayed ejaculation.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 By definition, the diagnosis of delayed ejaculation is only given to males. Distressing difficulties
 with orgasm in women would be considered under female orgasmic disorder.
 481
 Functional Consequences of Delayed Ejaculation
 Delayed ejaculation is often associated with considerable psychological distress in one or both
 partners.
 Difficulty with ejaculation may contribute to difficulties in conception and lead to significant
 fertility assessment, as the lack of ejaculation is not often spontaneously discussed by individuals
 unless there is direct inquiry from their physician.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Another medical condition or injury and/or its treatment.
 A major diagnostic challenge is
Substance/medication use.
 Dysfunction with orgasm.
 F52.21
 differentiating between a delayed ejaculation that is fully explained by another medical condition
 or injury (or its treatment) and a delayed ejaculation attributable to a variety of proportionally
 different biomedical-psychosocial and cultural factors that determine the symptom(s). A number
 of medical conditions or injuries, along with their treatments, may produce delays in ejaculation
 independent of psychosocial and cultural issues.
 Delayed ejaculation must be differentiated from a number of urological conditions
 (especially other ejaculatory disorders), including retrograde ejaculation or anejaculation, which
 is typically the result of etiologies ranging from hormonal to neurological and/or anatomical
 abnormalities, including ejaculatory duct obstruction and other urological disorders.
 A number of pharmacological agents, such as antidepressants,
 antipsychotics, α sympathetic drugs, alcohol, and opioid drugs, can cause ejaculatory problems.
 In such cases, the diagnosis is substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction instead of
 delayed ejaculation.
 It is important in the history to ascertain whether the complaint concerns
 delayed ejaculation or the sensation of orgasm, or both. Ejaculation occurs in the genitals,
 whereas the experience of orgasm is believed to be primarily subjective. Ejaculation and orgasm
 usually occur together but not always. For example, a male with a normal ejaculatory pattern
 may complain of decreased pleasure (i.e., anhedonic ejaculation). Such a complaint would not be
 coded as delayed ejaculation but could be coded as other specified sexual dysfunction or
 unspecified sexual dysfunction.
 Comorbidity
 There is some evidence to suggest that delayed ejaculation may be more common in severe
 forms of major depressive disorder.