Premature (Early) Ejaculation
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of ejaculation occurring during partnered sexual
 activity within approximately 1 minute following vaginal penetration and before
 the individual wishes it.
502
 Note: Although the diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation may be applied to
 individuals engaged in nonvaginal sexual activities, specific duration criteria have
 not been established for these activities.
 B. The symptom in Criterion A must have been present for at least 6 months and
 must be experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions
 of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all
 contexts).
 C. The symptom in Criterion A causes clinically significant distress in the individual.
 D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
 as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
 and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
 medical condition.
 Specify whether:
 Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
 sexually active.
 Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
 function.
 Specify whether:
 Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
 Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Ejaculation occurring within approximately 30 seconds to 1 minute of
 vaginal penetration.
 Moderate: Ejaculation occurring within approximately 15–30 seconds of vaginal
 penetration.
 Severe: Ejaculation occurring prior to sexual activity, at the start of sexual
 activity, or within approximately 15 seconds of vaginal penetration.
 Diagnostic Features
 Premature (early) ejaculation is manifested by ejaculation that occurs prior to or shortly after
 vaginal penetration, operationalized by an individual’s estimate of ejaculatory latency (i.e.,
 elapsed time before ejaculation) after vaginal penetration. Although the diagnostic criteria
 specify penile-vaginal sex, it is reasonable to assume that similar estimates of ejaculatory latency
 apply to males having sex with males, as well as to other sexual behaviors. Estimated and
 measured intravaginal ejaculatory latencies are highly correlated as long as the ejaculatory
 latency is of short duration; therefore, self-reported estimates of ejaculatory latency are sufficient
 for diagnostic purposes. A 60-second intravaginal ejaculatory latency time was previously
 considered to be an appropriate cutoff for the diagnosis of lifelong premature (early) ejaculation
 in men; however, expert consensus now considers this latency time to be too brief and instead
recommends a 120-second threshold.
 Associated Features
 Many males with premature (early) ejaculation complain of a sense of lack of control over
 ejaculation and report apprehension about their anticipated inability to delay ejaculation on
 future sexual encounters.
 The following factors may be relevant in the evaluation of any sexual dysfunction: 1) partner
 factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor
 communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors
 (e.g., history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety),
 and stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., lack of privacy,
 inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5)
 medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment.
 503
 Prevalence
 Estimates of the prevalence of premature (early) ejaculation vary widely depending on the
 definition utilized. Internationally, a prevalence range of 8%–30% has been reported across all
 ages, with even lower and higher rates in other studies. Prevalence of premature (early)
 ejaculation may increase with age. For example, the prevalence among males ages 18–30 in
 Switzerland and Turkey is about 9%–11%, while the reported prevalence of concern among
 males ages 50–59 in the United States about how rapidly they ejaculate may be as high as 55%.
 When premature (early) ejaculation is defined as ejaculation occurring within approximately 1
 minute of vaginal penetration, only 1%–3% of males would be diagnosed with the disorder.
 Development and Course
 By definition, lifelong premature (early) ejaculation starts during a male’s initial sexual
 experiences and persists thereafter. Some males may experience premature (early) ejaculation
 during their initial sexual encounters but gain ejaculatory control over time. It is the persistence
 of ejaculatory problems for longer than 6 months that determines the diagnosis of premature
 (early) ejaculation. In contrast, some males develop the disorder after a period of having a
 normal ejaculatory latency, known as acquired premature (early) ejaculation. There is far less
 known about acquired premature (early) ejaculation than about lifelong premature (early)
 ejaculation. The acquired form likely has a later onset, usually appearing during or after the
 fourth decade of life. Lifelong is relatively stable throughout life.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Premature (early) ejaculation may be more common in males with anxiety
 disorders, especially social anxiety disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 There is a moderate genetic contribution to lifelong premature (early)
 ejaculation. Premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with dopamine transporter gene
 polymorphism or serotonin transporter gene polymorphism. Thyroid disease, prostatitis, and
drug withdrawal are associated with acquired premature (early) ejaculation. Positron emission
 tomography measures of regional cerebral blood flow during ejaculation have shown primary
 activation in the mesocephalic transition zone, including the ventral tegmental area.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Perception of what constitutes a normal ejaculatory latency differs cross-culturally and may be
 related to varying awareness of sexual dysfunction, concern about sexual failure, and perceptions
 about the importance of sex. Measured ejaculatory latencies may differ in some countries.
 Cultural or religious factors may contribute to these differences. For example, reports of
 premature (early) ejaculation were more common in arranged marriages, because of factors such
 as anxiety over family pressures and lack of premarital sexual experience.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Premature (early) ejaculation is a sexual dysfunction in men. Men and their sexual partners may
 differ in their perception of what constitutes an acceptable ejaculatory latency. There may be
 increasing concerns in women about early ejaculation in their sexual partners, which may be a
 reflection of changing societal attitudes concerning women’s sexual activity.
 504
 Diagnostic Markers
 Ejaculatory latency is usually monitored in research settings by the sexual partner utilizing a
 timing device (e.g., stopwatch), though this is not ideal in real-life sexual situations. In clinical
 settings, the man’s estimate of the time between intravaginal penetration and ejaculation should
 be accepted in lieu of stopwatch measurements.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Among males receiving treatment for premature (early) ejaculation with comorbid depression,
 elevated rates of suicidal thoughts or behavior have been observed; although the affected males
 attributed the suicidal symptoms to their premature (early) ejaculation, the presence of
 depression was also a likely contributing factor.
 Functional Consequences of Premature (Early) Ejaculation
 A pattern of premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with decreased self-esteem and self
confidence, a sense of lack of control, and adverse consequences for partner relationships. It may
 also cause personal distress and decreased sexual satisfaction in the sexual partner. Single males
 are more bothered than partnered males by premature (early) ejaculation because of its
 interference with seeking and maintaining new relationships. Ejaculation prior to penetration
 may be associated with difficulties in conception.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction.
 When problems with premature (early)
 ejaculation are attributable exclusively to substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal,
Ejaculatory concerns that do not meet diagnostic criteria.
 substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction should be diagnosed.
 It is necessary to identify males with normal
 ejaculatory latencies who desire longer ejaculatory latencies and males who have episodic
 premature (early) ejaculation (e.g., during the first sexual encounter with a new partner when a
 short ejaculatory latency may be common or normative). Neither of these situations would lead
 to a diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation, even though these situations may be distressing to
 some males.
 Comorbidity
 Premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with erectile problems. In many cases, it may be
 difficult to determine which difficulty preceded the other. Lifelong premature (early) ejaculation
 may be associated with certain anxiety disorders. Acquired premature (early) ejaculation may be
 associated with prostatitis, thyroid disease, or drug withdrawal (e.g., during opioid withdrawal).