Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A clinically significant disturbance in sexual function is predominant in the clinical
 picture.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 505
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by a sexual dysfunction that is not
 substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sexual
 dysfunction could include the following:
 The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
 the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
 evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non
substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction (e.g., a history of recurrent
 non-substance/medication-related episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress in the individual.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
 attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 sexual dysfunctions are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
 the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a
 substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced sexual dysfunction, the 4th position character is “1,” and
 the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance
induced sexual dysfunction (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced
 sexual dysfunction”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced sexual dysfunction, the 4th position character is “2,” and
 the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe
 [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use
 disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy
 use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should
 record only the substance-induced sexual dysfunction.
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.181 F10.281 F10.981
 Opioid F11.181 F11.281 F11.981
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.181 F13.281 F13.981
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.181 F15.281 F15.981
 Cocaine F14.181 F14.281 F14.981
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.181 F19.281 F19.981
 506
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
 substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
 medication.
Specify current severity:
 Mild: Occurs on 25%–50% of occasions of sexual activity.
 Moderate: Occurs on 50%–75% of occasions of sexual activity.
 Severe: Occurs on 75% or more of occasions of sexual activity.
 Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction begins with the specific
 substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sexual dysfunction. The ICD-10-CM
 code that corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the
 criteria set. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10
CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name of the specific
 substance recorded (e.g., F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual dysfunction). In cases in which a
 substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific substance is unknown, the ICD-10
CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used and the fact that the substance is
 unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.981 unknown substance-induced sexual dysfunction).
 When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
 listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced sexual
 dysfunction, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during
 withdrawal, with onset after medication use), followed by the severity specifier (e.g., mild,
 moderate, severe). For example, in the case of erectile dysfunction occurring during intoxication
 in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is F10.281 severe alcohol use disorder
 with alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset during intoxication, moderate. A separate
 diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
 sexual dysfunction occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
 heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.981
 amphetamine-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
 substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sexual dysfunction, each
 should be listed separately (e.g., F14.181 mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sexual
 dysfunction, with onset during intoxication, moderate; F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual
 dysfunction, with onset after medication use, moderate).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are clinically
 significant disturbances in sexual function that are predominant in the clinical picture (Criterion
 A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or medication).
 The sexual dysfunction must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
 withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or
 medications must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication
induced sexual dysfunction due to a prescribed treatment for a
 507
 mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the individual is
receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with the
 medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the sexual dysfunction will usually improve or
 remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and
 the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
 should not be given if the onset of the sexual dysfunction precedes the substance/medication
 intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (i.e.,
 usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal.
 Associated Features
 Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
 substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
 and other (or unknown) substances. Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with
 withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
 anxiolytics; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that can induce sexual dysfunctions
 include antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormonal contraceptives.
 The most commonly reported side effect of antidepressant drugs is difficulty with orgasm or
 ejaculation in men, and with arousal in women. Problems with desire and erection are less
 frequent. There is evidence that the effects of antidepressant medications on sexual dysfunction
 occur regardless of levels of depression. Approximately 30% of sexual complaints are clinically
 significant. Certain agents (i.e., bupropion, mirtazapine, nefazodone, and vilazodone) appear to
 have lower rates of sexual side effects than other antidepressants.
 The sexual problems associated with antipsychotic drugs, including problems with sexual
 desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or orgasm, have occurred with typical as well as
 atypical agents. However, problems are less common with prolactin-sparing antipsychotics or
 those that do not block dopamine receptors.
 Although the effects of mood stabilizers on sexual function are unclear, it is possible that
 lithium and anticonvulsants, with the possible exception of lamotrigine, have adverse effects on
 sexual desire. Problems with orgasm may occur with gabapentin. Similarly, there may be a
 higher prevalence of erectile and orgasm problems associated with benzodiazepines. There have
 not been such reports with buspirone.
 Many nonpsychiatric medications, such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and
 hormonal agents, are associated with disturbances in sexual function. Use of 5-α-reductase
 inhibitors (e.g., dutasteride, finasteride) may reduce erectile function, ejaculatory function, and
 libido in men.
 Illicit substance use is associated with decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and
 difficulty reaching orgasm. Sexual dysfunctions are also seen in individuals receiving methadone
 but are seldom reported by individuals receiving buprenorphine. Chronic nicotine or chronic
 alcohol abuse are associated with erectile problems. Cannabis, like alcohol, is a central nervous
 system depressant, and its use may be a risk factor for sexual dysfunction; however, it has also
 been suggested to potentially improve satisfaction with orgasm.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence and the incidence of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are
 unclear, likely because of underreporting of treatment-emergent sexual side effects. Data on
substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction typically concern the effects of antidepressant
 drugs. The prevalence of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction varies in part depending on
 the specific agent. Approximately 25%–80% of individuals taking monoamine oxidase
 inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, serotonergic antidepressants, and combined serotonergic
adrenergic antidepressants report sexual side effects. There
 508
 are differences in the incidence of sexual side effects between some serotonergic and combined
 adrenergic-serotonergic antidepressants, with medications such as citalopram, fluoxetine,
 fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine having the highest rates of sexual
 dysfunction.
 Approximately 50% of individuals taking antipsychotic medications will experience adverse
 sexual side effects, including problems with sexual desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or
 orgasm. The incidence of these side effects among different antipsychotic agents is unclear.
 Exact prevalence and incidence of sexual dysfunctions among users of nonpsychiatric
 medications such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and hormonal agents are
 unknown. Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction have been reported high-dose opioid drugs for
 pain. There are increased rates of decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and difficulty
 reaching orgasm associated with illicit substance use. The prevalence of sexual problems appears
 related to chronic drug abuse and appears higher in individuals who abuse heroin (approximately
 60%–70%) than in individuals who abuse amphetamine-type substances or 3,4
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (i.e., MDMA, ecstasy). Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction
 are also seen in individuals receiving methadone but are seldom reported by individuals
 receiving buprenorphine. Chronic alcohol abuse and chronic nicotine abuse are related to higher
 rates of erectile problems.
 Development and Course
 The onset of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction may be as early as 8 days after the agent
 is first taken. Approximately 30% of individuals with mild to moderate orgasm delay will
 experience spontaneous remission of the dysfunction within 6 months. In some cases, serotonin
 reuptake inhibitor–induced sexual dysfunction may persist after the agent is discontinued. The
 time to onset of sexual dysfunction after initiation of antipsychotic drugs or drugs of abuse is
 unknown. It is probable that the adverse effects of nicotine and alcohol may not appear until after
 years of use. Premature (early) ejaculation can sometimes occur after cessation of opioid use.
 There is some evidence that disturbances in sexual function related to substance/medication use
 increase with age.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There may be an interaction among cultural factors, the influence of medications on sexual
 functioning, and the response of the individual to those changes.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Some gender differences in sexual side effects from substances and medications may exist, such
Non-substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunctions.
 that men may more often report impairments with desire and orgasm following antidepressant
 use, and women may more often report difficulties with sexual arousal.
 Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual
 Dysfunction
 Medication-induced sexual dysfunction may result in medication noncompliance, such as
 stopping medications or using them irregularly, which could contribute to the lack of efficacy for
 antidepressants.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Many mental disorders, such as depressive,
 bipolar, anxiety, and psychotic disorders, are associated with disturbances of sexual function.
 Thus, differentiating a substance/medication-induced sexual
 509
 dysfunction from a manifestation of the underlying mental disorder can be quite difficult. The
 diagnosis is usually established if a close relationship between substance/medication initiation or
 discontinuation is observed. A clear diagnosis can be established if the problem occurs after
 substance/medication initiation, dissipates with substance/medication discontinuation, and recurs
 with introduction of the same agent. Most substance/medication-induced side effects occur
 shortly after initiation or discontinuation. Sexual side effects that only occur after chronic use of
 a substance/medication may be extremely difficult to diagnose with certainty.