Gambling Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Persistent and recurrent problematic gambling behavior leading to clinically
 significant impairment or distress, as indicated by the individual exhibiting four
 (or more) of the following in a 12-month period:
 1. Needs to gamble with increasing amounts of money in order to achieve the
 desired excitement.
 2. Is restless or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop gambling.
 3. Has made repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop
 gambling.
 4. Is often preoccupied with gambling (e.g., having persistent thoughts of
reliving past gambling experiences, handicapping or planning the next
 venture, thinking of ways to get money with which to gamble).
 5. Often gambles when feeling distressed (e.g., helpless, guilty, anxious,
 depressed).
 6. After losing money gambling, often returns another day to get even (“chasing”
 one’s losses).
 7. Lies to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling.
 8. Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career
 opportunity because of gambling.
 9. Relies on others to provide money to relieve desperate financial situations
 caused by gambling.
 B. The gambling behavior is not better explained by a manic episode.
 Specify if:
 Episodic: Meeting diagnostic criteria at more than one time point, with
 symptoms subsiding between periods of gambling disorder for at least several
 months.
 Persistent: Experiencing continuous symptoms, to meet diagnostic criteria for
 multiple years.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for gambling disorder were previously met,
 none of the criteria for gambling disorder have been met for at least 3 months
 but for less than 12 months.
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for gambling disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for gambling disorder have been met during a period of
 12 months or longer.
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: 4–5 criteria met.
 Moderate: 6–7 criteria met.
 Severe: 8–9 criteria met.
 662
 Note: Although some behavioral conditions that do not involve ingestion of substances
 have similarities to substance-related disorders, only one disorder—gambling disorder—
 has sufficient data to be included in this section.
 Specifiers
 Severity is based on the number of criteria endorsed. Individuals with mild gambling disorder
 may exhibit only 4–5 of the criteria, with the most frequently endorsed criteria usually related to
 preoccupation with gambling and “chasing” losses. Individuals with moderately severe gambling
 disorder exhibit more of the criteria (i.e., 6–7). Individuals with the most severe form will exhibit
all or most of the nine criteria (i.e., 8–9). Jeopardizing relationships or career opportunities
 because of gambling and relying on others to provide money for gambling losses are typically
 the least often endorsed criteria and most often occur among those with more severe gambling
 disorder. Furthermore, individuals presenting for treatment of gambling disorder typically have
 moderate to severe forms of the disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 Gambling involves risking something of value in the hopes of obtaining something of greater
 value. In many cultures, individuals gamble on games and events, and most do so without
 experiencing problems. However, some individuals develop substantial impairment related to
 their gambling behaviors. The essential feature of gambling disorder is persistent and recurrent
 maladaptive gambling behavior that disrupts personal, family, and/or vocational pursuits
 (Criterion A). Gambling disorder is defined as a cluster of four or more of the symptoms listed in
 Criterion A occurring at any time in the same 12-month period.
 A pattern of “chasing one’s losses” may develop, with an urgent need to continue gambling
 (often with placing larger bets or taking greater risks) to undo a loss or series of losses. The
 individual may abandon a gambling strategy and try to win back losses all at once. Although
 many gamblers may “chase” for short periods of time, it is the frequent, and often long-term,
 “chase” that is characteristic of gambling disorder (Criterion A6). Individuals may lie to family
 members, therapists, or others to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling; these
 instances of deceit may also include, but are not limited to, covering up illegal behaviors such as
 forgery, fraud, theft, or embezzlement to obtain money with which to gamble (Criterion A7).
 Individuals may also engage in “bailout” behavior, turning to family or others for help with a
 desperate financial situation that was caused by gambling (Criterion A9).
 In some cases, symptoms meeting diagnostic criteria for gambling disorder may occur as a
 direct physiological consequence of taking dopaminergic medications, such as those used to treat
 Parkinson’s disease. When such symptoms are induced by a medication, these cases would be
 diagnosed as gambling disorder.
 Associated Features
 Distortions in thinking (e.g., denial, superstitions, a sense of power and control over the outcome
 of chance events, overconfidence) may be present in individuals with gambling disorder. Many
 individuals with gambling disorder believe that money is both the cause of and the solution to
 their problems. Some individuals with gambling disorder are impulsive, competitive, energetic,
 restless, and easily bored; they may be overly concerned with the approval of others and may be
 generous to the point of extravagance when winning. Other individuals with gambling disorder
 are depressed and lonely, and they may gamble when feeling helpless, guilty, or depressed.
 Prevalence
 The past-year prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%–0.3% in the general U.S.
 population, with a range of 0.1%–0.7% observed across international studies. In the
 663
general U.S. population, the lifetime prevalence rate is about 0.4%–1.0%. For women, the
 lifetime prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%, and for men it is about 0.6%. The
 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 gambling disorder varies among ethnoracial groups in the
 United States: it is 0.52% in African Americans, 0.25% in Latinx, and 0.23% in non-Latinx
 Whites.
 Development and Course
 The onset of gambling disorder can occur during adolescence or young adulthood, but in other
 individuals it manifests during middle or even older adulthood. Generally, gambling disorder
 develops over the course of years, although the progression appears to be more rapid in women
 than in men. National data from the United States and Canada show that most individuals who
 develop a gambling disorder evidence a pattern of gambling that gradually increases in both
 frequency and amount of wagering. Certainly, milder forms can develop into more severe cases.
 Most individuals with gambling disorder report that one or two types of gambling are most
 problematic for them, although some individuals participate in many forms of gambling.
 Individuals are likely to engage in certain types of gambling (e.g., buying scratch tickets daily)
 more frequently than others (e.g., playing slot machines or blackjack at the casino weekly).
 Frequency of gambling can be related more to the type of gambling than to the severity of the
 overall gambling disorder. For example, purchasing a single scratch ticket each day may not be
 problematic, while less frequent casino, sports, or card gambling may be part of a gambling
 disorder. Similarly, amounts of money spent wagering are not in themselves indicative of
 gambling disorder. Some individuals can wager thousands of dollars per month and not have a
 problem with gambling, while others may wager much smaller amounts but experience
 substantial gambling-related difficulties.
 Gambling patterns may be regular or episodic, and gambling disorder can be persistent or in
 remission. Gambling can increase during periods of stress or depression and during periods of
 substance use or abstinence. There may be periods of heavy gambling and severe problems,
 times of total abstinence, and periods of nonproblematic gambling. Gambling disorder is
 sometimes associated with spontaneous, long-term remissions. Nevertheless, some individuals
 underestimate their vulnerability to develop gambling disorder or to relapse following remission.
 When in a period of remission, they may incorrectly assume that they will have no problem
 regulating gambling and that they can engage in some forms of gambling nonproblematically,
 only to experience a relapse of gambling disorder.
 Early expression of gambling disorder is more common among young men (ages 18–21
 years) than among young women. Individuals who begin gambling in youth often do so with
 family members or friends. Development of early-life gambling disorder appears to be associated
 with impulsivity and substance abuse. Internet gambling has been linked to risky and
 problematic gambling among youth and may be conducted in a more isolative (i.e., nonpeer)
 fashion. Some video gaming characteristics (e.g., loot boxes or loot crates containing prizes
 determined by chance that may be of higher or lower value or desirability) overlap with
 gambling behavior and may influence the course of gambling disorder. Many high school and
 college students who develop gambling disorder grow out of the disorder over time, although it
 remains a lifelong problem for some. Mid- and later-life onset of gambling disorder is more
 common among women than among men.
There are age and gender variations in the type of gambling activities and the prevalence
 rates of gambling disorder. Gambling disorder in the United States is more common among
 younger and middle-age individuals than among older adults. Among U.S. young adults (ages
 18–21 years), the disorder is more prevalent in young men than in young women. Younger
 individuals prefer different forms of gambling (e.g., sports betting), whereas older adults are
 more likely to develop problems with slot machine and bingo gambling. Although the
 proportions of individuals who seek treatment for gambling disorder are low across all age
 groups in the United States, younger individuals are especially unlikely to present for treatment.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 664
 Gambling that begins in childhood or early adolescence is associated with
 increased rates of gambling disorder. Gambling disorder also appears to aggregate with
 antisocial personality disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders, and other substance use
 disorders, particularly alcohol use disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Gambling disorder can aggregate in families, and this effect appears to
 relate to both environmental and genetic factors. Gambling problems are more frequent in
 monozygotic than in dizygotic twins. Gambling disorder is also more prevalent among first
degree relatives of individuals with moderate to severe alcohol use disorder than among the
 general population.
 Course modifiers.
 Many individuals, including adolescents and young adults, are likely to resolve
 their problems with gambling disorder over time, although a strong predictor of future gambling
 problems is previous gambling problems. Psychopathology, including attention
deficit/hyperactivity and anxiety disorders, has been found to be associated with increased risk of
 onset of gambling disorder among those who gamble and with persistence of gambling disorder
 symptoms over time.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Types of gambling activities vary across cultural contexts and ethnoracial groups (e.g., pai gow,
 cockfights, blackjack, horse racing). Some Indigenous populations in Canada, New Zealand, and
 the United States have high prevalence rates of gambling problems, possibly related to limited
 economic opportunities, the expectation that gambling may help advance social goals, and the
 location of casinos on some U.S. tribal lands. U.S.-born individuals have higher rates of
 gambling problems than first-generation immigrants to the United States. Endorsement of
 specific disorder criteria may vary across ethnoracial groups. For example, among individuals
 with gambling problems, Asian Americans may be less likely than other groups to endorse being
 preoccupied with gambling (Criterion A4), while African Americans and Latinx may be more
 likely to endorse repeated unsuccessful efforts to control gambling (Criterion A3).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Men develop gambling disorder at higher rates than women, although this gender gap may be
 narrowing. Data from treatment-seeking populations have suggested that women may develop
gambling problems more rapidly after the onset of gambling (so-called telescoping), although
 general population data suggest that men progress more rapidly to disordered gambling than
 women do. Although women seek treatment sooner than men do, rates of treatment seeking in
 U.S. national surveys are low (< 10%) among individuals with gambling disorder regardless of
 gender.
 Women may gamble as a maladaptive approach to negative affect, whereas men may gamble
 more for the thrill of it. Compared with men, women may also experience more shame related to
 gambling. Men tend to wager on different forms of gambling than women, with cards, sports,
 and horse race gambling more prevalent among men, and slot machine and bingo gambling more
 common among women. Women with gambling disorder are more likely than men with
 gambling disorder to have depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 In a U.S. study, up to half of individuals in treatment for gambling disorder in Connecticut
 reported suicidal thoughts, and about 17% reported attempted suicide. A nationwide register
 study in Sweden showed that compared with individuals without gambling disorder, individuals
 ages 20–74 years with gambling disorder have a 15-fold increased suicide mortality rate.
 665
 Functional Consequences of Gambling Disorder
 Areas of psychosocial, health, and mental health functioning may be adversely affected by
 gambling disorder. Specifically, individuals with gambling disorder may, because of their
 involvement with gambling, jeopardize or lose important relationships with family members or
 friends. Such problems may occur from repeatedly lying to others to cover up the extent of
 gambling or from requesting money that is used for gambling or to pay off gambling debts.
 Employment or educational activities may likewise be adversely impacted by gambling disorder;
 absenteeism or poor work or school performance can occur with gambling disorder, as
 individuals may gamble during work or school hours or be preoccupied with gambling or its
 adverse consequences when they should be working or studying. Individuals with gambling
 disorder in a U.S. national sample had poor general health and utilized medical services at high
 rates.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Nondisordered gambling.
 Gambling disorder must be distinguished from professional and social
 gambling. In professional gambling, risks are limited and discipline is central. Social gambling
 typically occurs with friends or colleagues and lasts for a limited period of time, with acceptable
 losses. Some persons can experience problems associated with gambling (e.g., short-term
 chasing behavior and loss of control) that do not meet the full criteria for gambling disorder.
 Manic episode.
 Loss of judgment and excessive gambling may occur during a manic episode. An
 additional diagnosis of gambling disorder should be given only if the gambling behavior is not
 better explained by manic episodes (e.g., a history of maladaptive gambling behavior at times
 other than during a manic episode). Alternatively, an individual with gambling disorder may,
during a period of gambling, exhibit behavior that resembles a manic episode, but once the
 individual is away from the gambling, these manic-like features dissipate.
 Personality disorders.
 Problems with gambling may occur in individuals with antisocial
 personality disorder and other personality disorders. If the criteria are met for both disorders,
 both can be diagnosed.
 Gambling symptoms due to dopaminergic medications.
 Some individuals taking dopaminergic
 medications (e.g., for Parkinson‘s disease) may experience urges to gamble that might be
 distressing or impairing enough to meet criteria for gambling disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis
 of gambling disorder would be warranted.
 Comorbidity
 Gambling disorder is associated with poor general health. In addition, some specific medical
 conditions, such as tachycardia and angina, are more common among individuals with gambling
 disorder than in the general population, even when other substance use disorders, including
 tobacco use disorder, are controlled for. In U.S. national surveys, individuals with gambling
 disorder have high rates of comorbidity with other mental disorders, such as substance use
 disorders, depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and personality disorders. In some individuals,
 other mental disorders may precede gambling disorder and be either absent or present during the
 manifestation of gambling disorder. Gambling disorder may also occur prior to the onset of other
 mental disorders, especially bipolar and related disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use
 disorders. In a U.S. national survey, in approximately three-quarters of cases of individuals with
 gambling disorder and another mental disorder, other psychopathology preceded the gambling
 disorder.
 666