
Gender Dysphoria
Diagnostic Criteria
Gender Dysphoria in Children
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and
assigned gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least six of
the following (one of which must be Criterion A1):
1. A strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that one is the other
gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
2. In boys (assigned gender), a strong preference for cross-dressing or
simulating female attire; or in girls (assigned gender), a strong preference for
wearing only typical masculine clothing and a strong resistance to the
wearing of typical feminine clothing.
3. A strong preference for cross-gender roles in make-believe play or fantasy
play.
4. A strong preference for the toys, games, or activities stereotypically used or
engaged in by the other gender.
5. A strong preference for playmates of the other gender.
6. In boys (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically masculine toys,
games, and activities and a strong avoidance of rough-and-tumble play; or in
girls (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically feminine toys, games,
and activities.
7. A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy.
8. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics that
F64.0
match one’s experienced gender.
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, school, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder/difference of sex development (e.g., a congenital
adrenogenital disorder such as E25.0 congenital adrenal hyperplasia or E34.50
androgen insensitivity syndrome).
Coding note: Code the disorder/difference of sex development as well as
gender dysphoria.
Gender Dysphoria in Adolescents and Adults
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender
and assigned gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least
two of the following:
1. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and
primary and/or secondary sex characteristics (or in young adolescents, the
anticipated secondary sex characteristics).
513
2. A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex
characteristics 
because 
of 
a 
marked 
incongruence 
with 
one’s
experienced/expressed gender (or in young adolescents, a desire to prevent
the development of the anticipated secondary sex characteristics).
3. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the
other gender.
4. A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative gender different
from one’s assigned gender).
5. A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative gender
different from one’s assigned gender).
6. A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other
gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder/difference of sex development (e.g., a congenital
adrenogenital disorder such as E25.0 congenital adrenal hyperplasia or E34.50
androgen insensitivity syndrome).
Coding note: Code the disorder/difference of sex development as well as
gender dysphoria.
Specify if:
Posttransition: The individual has transitioned to full-time living in the
experienced gender (with or without legalization of gender change) and has
undergone (or is preparing to have) at least one gender-affirming medical
procedure or treatment regimen—namely, regular gender-affirming hormone
treatment or gender reassignment surgery confirming the experienced gender
(e.g., breast augmentation surgery and/or vulvovaginoplasty in an individual
assigned male at birth; transmasculine chest surgery and/or phalloplasty or
metoidioplasty in an individual assigned female at birth).
Specifiers
The specifier “with a disorder/difference of sex development” should be used in the context of
individuals who have a specific and codable disorder/difference of sex development documented
in their medical record.
The “posttransition” specifier may be used in the context of continuing treatment procedures
that serve to support the new gender assignment.
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with gender dysphoria have a marked incongruence between the gender to which
they have been assigned (usually based on phenotypic sex at birth, referred to as birth-assigned
gender) and their experienced/expressed gender. This discrepancy is the core component of the
diagnosis. There must also be evidence of distress about this incongruence. Experienced gender
may include alternative gender identities beyond binary stereotypes. Consequently, distress may
involve not only the experience that the individual is a male or female gender other than the one
assigned at birth but also an experience that the individual is an intermediate or alternative
gender that differs from the individual’s birth-assigned gender.
Gender dysphoria manifests itself differently in different age groups. The following examples
may be less prominent in children raised in surroundings with fewer gender stereotypes.
Prepubertal individuals assigned female at birth with gender dysphoria may express a
marked, persistent feeling or conviction that they are a boy, express aversion to the idea of
514
being a girl, or assert they will grow up to be a man. They often prefer boys’ clothing and
hairstyles, may be perceived by strangers as boys, and may ask to be called by a boy’s name.
Sometimes they display intense negative reactions to parental attempts to have them wear dresses
or other feminine attire. Some may refuse to attend school or social events where such clothes
are required. These children may demonstrate marked gender nonconformity in role-playing,
dreams, gender-typed play and toy preferences, styles, mannerisms, fantasies, and peer
preferences. Contact sports, rough-and-tumble play, traditional boyhood games, and boys as
playmates are most often preferred. They show little interest in stereotypically feminine toys
(e.g., dolls) or activities (e.g., feminine dress-up or role-play). Occasionally, they refuse to
urinate in a sitting position. Some may express a desire to have a penis or claim to have a penis
or that they will grow one when older. They may also state that they do not want to develop
breasts or menstruate.
Prepubertal individuals assigned male at birth with gender dysphoria may express a marked,
persistent feeling or conviction that they are a girl or assert that they will grow up to be a woman.
They may express aversion to the idea of being a boy. They often prefer dressing in girls’ or
women’s clothes or may improvise clothing from available materials (e.g., using towels, aprons,
and scarves for long hair or skirts). These children may demonstrate marked gender
nonconformity in gender-typed play and toy preferences, styles, mannerisms, and peer
preferences. They may role-play female figures (e.g., playing “mother”) and may be intensely
interested in female fantasy figures. Traditional feminine activities, stereotypical games, and
pastimes (e.g., “playing house”; drawing feminine pictures; watching television or videos of
favorite female characters) may be preferred. Stereotypical female-type dolls (e.g., Barbie) may
be favorite toys, and girls are their preferred playmates. They avoid rough-and-tumble play and
have little interest in stereotypically masculine toys (e.g., cars, trucks). They may state that they
find their penis or testes disgusting, that they wish them removed, or that they have, or wish to
have, a vagina.
Increasingly, parents are presenting to specialized clinics after their child with gender
dysphoria has already socially transitioned.
As the onset of puberty for individuals assigned female at birth is somewhere between ages 9
and 13, and between 11 and 14 for individuals assigned male at birth, their symptoms and
concerns may arise in a developmental phase somewhere between childhood and adolescence.
As secondary sex characteristics of younger adolescents are not yet fully developed, these
individuals may not state dislike of them, but they may be markedly distressed by imminent
physical changes.
In adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria, the discrepancy between experienced
gender and physical sex characteristics is often, but not always, accompanied by a desire to be
rid of primary and/or secondary sex characteristics and/or a strong desire to acquire some
primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of another gender. To varying degrees, older
adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria may adopt the behavior, clothing, and mannerisms
of their experienced gender. They feel uncomfortable being regarded by others, or functioning in
society, as members of their assigned gender. Some adults and adolescents may have a strong
desire to be of a different gender and treated as such, and they may have an inner certainty to feel
and respond as their experienced gender without seeking medical treatment to alter body
characteristics. They may find other ways to resolve the incongruence between
experienced/expressed and assigned gender by partially living in the desired role or by adopting
a gender role neither conventionally male nor conventionally female.
Associated Features
When visible signs of puberty develop, individuals assigned male at birth may shave their facial,
body, and leg hair at the first signs of growth. They sometimes bind their genitals to make
erections less visible. Individuals assigned female at birth may bind their breasts,
515
walk with a stoop, or use loose sweaters to make breasts less visible. Increasingly, adolescents
request, or may obtain without medical prescription and supervision, drugs that suppress
production of gonadal steroids (e.g., gonadotropin-releasing hormone [GnRH] agonists) or that
block gonadal hormone actions (e.g., spironolactone). Clinically referred adolescents often want
hormone treatment and many also wish for gender-affirming surgery. Adolescents living in an
accepting environment may openly express the desire to be and be treated as their experienced
gender and dress partly or completely as their experienced gender, have a hairstyle typical of
their experienced gender, preferentially seek friendships with peers of another gender, and/or
adopt a new first name consistent with their experienced gender. Older adolescents, when
sexually active, often do not show or allow partners to touch their sexual organs. For adults with
an aversion toward their genitals, sexual activity is constrained by the preference that their
genitals not be seen or touched by their partners. Not infrequently, adults may seek hormone
treatment (sometimes without medical prescription and supervision) and gender-affirming
surgery. Others are satisfied with either hormone treatment or surgery alone, or without any
gender-affirming medical treatment.
In children, adolescents, and adults with gender dysphoria, an overrepresentation of autism
spectrum traits has been observed. Also, individuals with autism spectrum disorder are more
likely to exhibit gender diversity.
Adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria before gender-affirming treatment and legal
gender change are at increased risk for mental health problems including suicidal ideation,
suicide attempts, and suicides. After gender reassignment, adjustment may vary, and suicide risk
and mental health problems may persist.
In prepubertal children, increasing age is associated with having more behavioral or
emotional problems; this is related to the increasing nonacceptance of gender-nonconforming
behavior by others. Children and adolescents who feel supported and accepted in their gender
nonconformity may show less or even no psychological problems.
Prevalence
There are no large-scale population studies of gender dysphoria. Based on gender-affirming
treatment–seeking populations, the prevalence for gender dysphoria diagnosis across populations
has been assessed to be less than 1/1,000 (i.e., < 0.1%) for both individuals assigned male at birth
and individuals assigned female at birth. Because many adults with gender dysphoria do not seek
care at specialty treatment programs, prevalence rates are likely underestimates. Prevalence
estimates based on surveys of self-reporting general population samples in the United States and
Europe suggest higher numbers, although varied methods of assessment make comparisons
difficult across studies. Self-identification as transgender ranges from 0.5% to 0.6%;
experiencing oneself as having an incongruent gender identity ranges from 0.6% to 1.1%; feeling
that one is a person of a different sex ranges from 2.1% to 2.6%; and the desire to undergo
medical treatment ranges from 0.2% to 0.6%.
Development and Course
Because expression of gender dysphoria varies with age, there are separate criteria sets for
children versus those for adolescents and adults. Criteria for children are defined in a more
concrete, behavioral manner than those for adolescents and adults. Young children are less likely
than older children, adolescents, and adults to express extreme and persistent anatomic
Gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex development.
dysphoria. In adolescents and adults, incongruence between experienced gender and assigned
gender is a central feature of the diagnosis. Factors related to distress and impairment also vary
with age. A very young child may show signs of distress (e.g., intense crying) only when parents
tell the child that he or she is “really” not a member of another gender but only “desires” to be.
Distress may not be manifest in social environments supportive of the child’s gender
nonconformity and may emerge only if there is
516
parental/social interference with the child’s gender variance. In adolescents and adults, distress
may manifest because of strong incongruence between experienced gender and birth-assigned
gender. Such distress may, however, be mitigated by supportive environments and knowledge
that biomedical treatments exist to reduce incongruence. Impairment (e.g., school refusal,
development of depression, anxiety, peer and behavioral problems, and substance abuse) may be
a correlate of gender dysphoria.
For clinic-referred children studied in
Canada and the Netherlands, onset of gender-nonconforming behaviors is usually between ages 2
and 4 years. This corresponds to the developmental time period in which most children begin
expressing gendered behaviors and interests. For some preschool-age children, both marked,
persistent gender-atypical behaviors and the expressed desire to be another gender may be
present, or labeling themselves as a member of another gender may occur. In other cases, the
gender expression appears later, usually at entry into elementary school. Children may
sometimes express discomfort with their sexual anatomy or will state the desire to have a sexual
anatomy corresponding to their experienced gender (“anatomic dysphoria”). Expressions of
anatomic dysphoria become more common as children with gender dysphoria approach and
anticipate puberty.
No general population studies exist of adolescent or adult outcomes of childhood gender
variance. Some prepubescent children expressing a desire to be another gender will not seek
gender-affirming somatic treatments when they reach puberty. They frequently report
nonheterosexual orientations and frequently marked gender-nonconforming behavior, although
not necessarily a transgender identity in adolescence/young adulthood. Some children with
gender dysphoria in childhood that remits in adolescence may experience a recurrence in
adulthood.
In individuals assigned male at birth, studies from North America and the Netherlands found
persistence ranged from 2% to 39%. In individuals assigned female at birth, persistence ranged
from 12% to 50%. Persistence of gender dysphoria is modestly correlated with dimensional
measures of severity ascertained at the time of a childhood baseline assessment. Early social
transition may also be a factor in persistence of gender dysphoria in adolescence.
Studies have shown a high incidence of sexual attraction to those of the individual’s birth-
assigned gender, regardless of the trajectory of the prepubescent child’s gender dysphoria. For
individuals whose gender dysphoria continues into adolescence and beyond, most self-identify as
heterosexual. In those who no longer have gender dysphoria by the time of adolescence, a
majority self-identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
Two broad trajectories have been described for development of gender dysphoria in
individuals who identify as either male or female.
Gender dysphoria in association with a disorder of sex development.
Temperamental.
As opposed to gender-nonconforming children, individuals with prepubertal-onset gender
dysphoria have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria in childhood. The
dysphoria can continue into adolescence and adulthood; alternatively, some individuals go
through a period in which the gender dysphoria either desists or is denied. At such times, these
individuals may self-identify as being gay or lesbian. Some may identify as heterosexual and
cisgender. However, it is possible that some of these individuals may experience a recurrence of
gender dysphoria later in life.
Regardless of whether the individual’s gender dysphoria persists or desists at a later date,
either the onset of puberty or the realization that puberty will begin with development of
secondary sex characteristics can prompt distressing feelings of gender incongruence that can
exacerbate the individual’s gender dysphoria.
The early/prepubertal-onset group often present for clinical, gender-affirming care during
childhood, during adolescence, or in young adulthood. This may reflect a more intense gender
dysphoria compared with individuals with late/postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria, whose
distress may be more variable and less intense.
517
Late-onset or pubertal/postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria occurs around puberty or even
much later in life. Some of these individuals report having had a desire to be of another gender in
childhood that was not expressed verbally to others or had gender-nonconforming behavior that
did not meet full criteria for gender dysphoria in childhood. Others have no recollection of any
signs of childhood gender dysphoria. Parents of individuals with gender dysphoria of
pubertal/postpubertal-onset often report surprise, as they saw no signs of gender dysphoria
during childhood.
Individuals 
with 
DSDs 
who
require early medical intervention or decisions about gender assignment come to clinical
attention at an early age. Depending on the condition, they may have been gonadectomized
(often because of risk of future malignancy) before puberty so that administration of exogenous
hormones is part of routine care to induce puberty. Infertility is common whether due to the
condition itself or to gonadectomy, and genital surgery may have been done in infancy or
childhood with the intent of affirming the assigned gender to both the affected individual and
caregivers.
Affected individuals may exhibit gender-nonconforming behavior starting in early childhood
in a manner that is predictable depending on the specific DSD syndrome and the gender
assignment, and thresholds for supporting social and medical gender transition in minors have
traditionally been much lower for those with compared to those without DSDs. As individuals
with some DSD syndromes become aware of their condition and medical history, many
experience uncertainty about their gender, as opposed to developing a firm conviction that they
are of another gender. The proportion who develop gender dysphoria and progress to gender
transition varies markedly depending on the particular syndrome and gender assignment.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Gender-variant behavior among individuals with prepubertal-onset gender
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
dysphoria can develop in early preschool age. Studies suggest that a greater intensity of gender
nonconformity and an older age at presentation make persistence of gender dysphoria into
adolescence and adulthood more likely. A predisposing factor under consideration, especially in
individuals with postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria (adolescence, adulthood), includes history
of transvestism that may develop into autogynephilia (i.e., sexual arousal associated with the
thought or image of oneself as a woman).
Individuals assigned male at birth with gender dysphoria without a DSD (in both
childhood and adolescence) more commonly have older brothers when compared with cisgender
males.
For individuals with gender dysphoria without a DSD, some genetic
contribution is suggested by evidence for (weak) familiality of gender dysphoria among nontwin
siblings, increased concordance for gender dysphoria in monozygotic compared with dizygotic
same-sex twins, and some degree of heritability of gender dysphoria. Research suggests that
gender dysphoria has a polygenetic basis involving interactions of several genes and
polymorphisms that may affect in utero sexual differentiation of the brain, contributing to gender
dysphoria in individuals assigned male at birth.
As to endocrine findings in individuals with gender dysphoria, no endogenous systemic
abnormalities in sex-hormone levels have been found in 46,XY individuals, whereas there appear
to be increased androgen levels (in the range found in hirsute women but far below normal male
levels) in 46,XX individuals. Overall, current evidence is insufficient to label gender dysphoria
without a DSD as a form of intersexuality limited to the central nervous system.
In gender dysphoria associated with a DSD, the likelihood of later gender dysphoria is
increased if prenatal production and utilization (via receptor sensitivity) of androgens are grossly
variant relative to what is usually seen in individuals with the same assigned
518
gender. Examples include 46,XY individuals with a history of normal male prenatal hormone
milieu but inborn nonhormonal genital defects (as in cloacal bladder exstrophy or penile
agenesis) and who have been assigned to the female gender. The likelihood of gender dysphoria
is further enhanced by additional, prolonged, highly gender-variant postnatal androgen exposure
with somatic virilization as may occur in female-raised and noncastrated 46,XY individuals with
5-alpha reductase-2 deficiency or 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency or in
female-raised 46,XX individuals with classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia with prolonged
periods of nonadherence to glucocorticoid replacement therapy. However, the prenatal androgen
milieu is more closely related to gendered behavior than to gender identity. Many individuals
with DSDs and markedly gender-variant behavior do not develop gender dysphoria. Thus,
gender-nonconforming behavior by itself should not be interpreted as an indicator of current or
future gender dysphoria. There appears to be a higher rate of gender dysphoria and patient-
initiated gender change from assigned female to male than from assigned male to female in
individuals prenatally exposed to a full complement of masculinizing hormonal influences.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals with gender dysphoria have been reported across many countries and cultural
contexts around the world. The equivalent of gender dysphoria has also been reported in
individuals living in cultural contexts with institutionalized gender identity categories other than
men/boys or women/girls that sanction gender nonconforming development. These include India,
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Oman, Samoa, Thailand, and Indigenous Peoples of North America. It is
unclear however, in such cultural contexts, whether the diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria
would be met with these individuals.
The prevalence of coexisting mental health problems differs among cultures; these
differences may also be related to differences in attitudes toward gender nonconformity in
children, adolescents, and adults. However, also in some non-Western cultures, anxiety has been
found to be relatively common in individuals with gender dysphoria, even in cultures with
accepting attitudes toward gender-variant behavior.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Sex differences in rate of referrals to specialty clinics vary by age group. In children, sex ratios
of individuals assigned male at birth to individuals assigned female at birth range from 1.25:1 to
4.3:1. Studies show increasing numbers of children and adolescents presenting to specialty
clinics, presentation at younger ages, more frequent early social transition, and a shift to a greater
number of individuals assigned female at birth in adolescents and young adults than individuals
assigned male at birth. In adults, estimates generally suggest more individuals assigned male at
birth seek gender-affirming treatment, with ratios ranging from 1:1 to 6.1:1 in most studies in the
United States and Europe.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Rates of suicidality and suicide attempts for transgender individuals are reported to range from
30% to 80%, with risk factors including past maltreatment, gender victimization, depression,
substance abuse, and younger age. Transgender adolescents referred to gender clinics have
substantially higher rates of suicidal thoughts and behaviors when compared with nonreferred
adolescents. Prior to receiving gender-affirming treatment and legal gender reassignment,
adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria are at increased risk for suicidal thoughts and
suicide attempts. After gender-affirming treatment, adjustment varies, and while improvement in
coexisting symptoms is often seen, some individuals continue to experience prominent anxiety
and affective symptoms and remain at increased risk for suicide.
519
A study of 572 children referred for gender identity concerns in Canada and several
comparison groups (siblings, other referred children, and nonreferred children) largely from
other high-income countries found that gender-referred children were 8.6 times more likely to
self-harm or attempt suicide than comparison children, even after adjustment for overall behavior
and peer relationship problems, and particularly in the second half of childhood. Among
adolescents, the highest rate of suicide attempt is among transgender young men, followed by
those defining themselves as neither male nor female.
Functional Consequences of Gender Dysphoria
Nonconformity to gender roles.
Transvestic disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Gender nonconformity may appear at all ages after the first 2–3 years of childhood and may
interfere with daily activities. In older children, gender nonconformity may affect peer
relationships and may lead to isolation from peer groups and to distress. Many children
experience teasing and harassment or pressure to dress in attire associated with their birth-
assigned sex, especially when growing up in a nonsupportive and nonaccepting environment.
Also in adolescents and adults, the distress resulting from gender incongruence often interferes
with daily activities. Relationship difficulties, including sexual relationship problems, are
common, and functioning at school or at work may be impaired. Gender dysphoria is associated
with high levels of stigmatization, discrimination, and victimization, leading to negative self-
concept, increased rates of depression, suicidality, and other mental disorder co-occurrence,
school dropout, and economic marginalization, including unemployment, with attendant social
and mental health risks, especially in individuals who lack family or social support. In addition,
these individuals’ access to health services and mental health services may be impeded by
structural barriers, such as institutional discomfort about, inexperience with, or hostility toward
working with this patient population.
Differential Diagnosis
Gender 
dysphoria 
should 
be 
distinguished 
from 
simple
nonconformity to stereotypical gender role behavior by the strong desire to be of another gender
than the assigned one and by the extent and pervasiveness of gender-variant activities and
interests. The diagnosis is not meant to merely describe nonconformity to stereotypical gender
role behavior (e.g., “tomboyism” in girls, “girly-boy” behavior in boys, occasional cross-dressing
in adult men). Given the increased openness of gender-diverse expressions by individuals across
the entire range of the transgender spectrum, it is important that the clinical diagnosis be limited
to those individuals whose distress and impairment meet the specified criteria.
Transvestic disorder is diagnosed in heterosexual (or bisexual) adolescent
and adult males (rarely in females) for whom women’s clothing generates sexual excitement and
causes distress and/or impairment without drawing their assigned gender into question. It is
occasionally accompanied by gender dysphoria. An individual with transvestic disorder who also
has clinically significant gender dysphoria can be given both diagnoses. In some cases of
postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria in individuals assigned male at birth who are attracted to
women, cross-dressing with sexual excitement is a precursor to the diagnosis of gender
dysphoria.
An individual with body dysmorphic disorder focuses on the alteration
or removal of a specific body part because it is perceived as abnormally formed, not because it
represents a repudiated assigned gender. When an individual’s presentation meets criteria for
both gender dysphoria and body dysmorphic disorder, both diagnoses can be given. Individuals
wishing to have a healthy limb amputated (termed by some body integrity identity disorder)
because it makes them feel more “complete” usually do not wish to change gender, but rather
desire to live as an amputee or a disabled person.
In individuals with autism spectrum disorder, diagnosing gender
dysphoria can be challenging. It can be difficult to differentiate potential co-occurring
520
Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
Other clinical presentations.
gender dysphoria from an autistic preoccupation because of the concrete and rigid thinking
around gender roles and/or poor understanding of social relationships characteristic of autism
spectrum disorder.
In schizophrenia, there may rarely be delusions of
belonging to some other gender. In the absence of psychotic symptoms, insistence by an
individual with gender dysphoria that he or she is another gender is not considered a delusion.
Schizophrenia (or other psychotic disorders) and gender dysphoria may co-occur. Gender-
themed delusions may occur in up to 20% of individuals with schizophrenia. They can usually be
differentiated from gender dysphoria by their bizarre content and by waxing and waning with
remissions and exacerbations of psychotic episodes.
Some individuals with an emasculinization desire who develop an
alternative, nonmale/nonfemale gender identity do have a presentation that meets criteria for
gender dysphoria. However, some males seek genital surgery for either aesthetic reasons or to
remove psychological effects of androgens without changing male identity; in these cases, the
criteria for gender dysphoria are not met.
Comorbidity
Clinically referred children with gender dysphoria show elevated levels of anxiety, disruptive,
impulse-control, and depressive disorders. Autism spectrum disorder is more prevalent in
clinically referred adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria than in the general population.
Clinically referred adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria often have high rates of
associated mental disorders, with anxiety and depressive disorders being the most common.
Individuals who have experienced harassment and violence may also develop posttraumatic
stress disorder.