Differential Diagnosis
Sensory deficits.
 Normal speech dysfluencies.
 Specific learning disorder, with impairment in reading.
 Bilingualism.
 Medication side effects.
 Adult-onset dysfluencies.
 Tourette’s disorder.
 F80.82
 Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment or other
 sensory deficit or a speech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in excess of those
 usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be
 made.
 The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysfluencies that
 occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase repetitions (e.g., “I
 want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled pauses, and parenthetical
 remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity as the child grows older, a
 diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be appropriate.
 Children who have dysfluencies when they
 read aloud may be diagnosed mistakenly as having a reading disorder. Oral reading fluency
 typically is measured by timed assessments. Slower reading rates may not accurately reflect the
 actual reading ability of children who stutter.
 It is necessary to distinguish between dysfluencies resulting from attempts to learn
 a new language and dysfluencies that indicate a fluency disorder, which typically appear in both
 languages.
 Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be detected
 by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication.
 If onset of dysfluencies is during or after adolescence, it is an “adult
onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder. Adult-onset dysfluencies are
 associated with specific neurological insults and a variety of medical conditions and mental
 disorders and may be specified with them, but they are not a DSM-5 diagnosis.
 Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of Tourette’s disorder should be
 distinguishable from the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder by their nature
 and timing.

