Differential Diagnosis
 Normal variations in language.
 Language disorder needs to be distinguished from normal
 developmental variations, and this distinction may be difficult to make before age 4 years.
 Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of language (e.g., dialects) must be considered
Hearing or other sensory impairment.
 Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 when an individual is being assessed for language impairment.
 Hearing impairment needs to be excluded as the primary
 cause of language difficulties. Language deficits may be associated with a hearing impairment,
 other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When language deficits are in excess of those
 usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of language disorder may be made.
 Language impairment is often the
 presenting feature of intellectual developmental disorder. However, the definitive diagnosis of
 intellectual developmental disorder may not be made until the child is able to complete
 standardized assessments. Language disorder can occur with varying degrees of intellectual
 ability, and a discrepancy between verbal and nonverbal ability is not necessary for a diagnosis
 of language disorder.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Autism spectrum disorder frequently manifests with delayed language
 development. However, autism spectrum disorder is often accompanied by behaviors not present
 in language disorder, such as lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., pulling
 individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g., carrying
 toys around but never playing with them), unusual communication patterns (e.g., knowing the
 alphabet but not responding to own name), and rigid adherence to routines and repetitive
 behaviors (e.g., flapping, spinning, echolalia).
 Neurological disorders.
 Language regression.
 Language disorder can be acquired in association with neurological
 disorders, including epilepsy (e.g., acquired aphasia or Landau-Kleffner syndrome).
 Loss of speech and language in a child at any age warrants thorough
 assessment to determine if there is a specific neurological condition, such as Landau-Kleffner
 syndrome. Language loss may be a symptom of seizures, and a diagnostic assessment is
 necessary to exclude the presence of epilepsy (e.g., routine and sleep electroencephalogram).
 Declines in critical social and communication behaviors during the first 2 years of life are
 evident in most children presenting with autism spectrum disorder and should signal the need for
 autism spectrum disorder assessment.
