Differential Diagnosis
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Autism spectrum disorder is the primary diagnostic consideration for
 individuals presenting with social communication deficits. The two disorders can be
 differentiated by the presence in autism spectrum disorder of restricted/repetitive patterns of
 behavior, interests, or activities and their absence in social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
 Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may only display the restricted/repetitive patterns of
 behavior, interests, and activities during the early developmental period, so a comprehensive
 history should be obtained. Current absence of symptoms would not preclude a diagnosis of
 autism spectrum disorder, if the restricted interests and repetitive behaviors were present in the
 past. A diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder should be considered only if the
 current symptoms or developmental history fails to reveal evidence of symptoms that meet the
 diagnostic criteria for restricted/repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities of autism
 spectrum disorder (i.e., Criterion B) causing current impairment. The social communication
 symptoms may be milder in social (pragmatic) communication disorder than in autism spectrum
 disorder, although qualitatively similar.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Primary deficits of ADHD may cause impairments in social
 communication and functional limitations of effective communication, social participation, or
 academic achievement.
Social anxiety disorder.
 Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and global developmental delay.
 F84.0
 The symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder overlap with
 those of social anxiety disorder. The differentiating feature is the timing of the onset of
 symptoms. In social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the individual has never had effective
 social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social communication skills developed
 appropriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or distress about social interactions.
 56
 Social
 communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global developmental delay or
 intellectual developmental disorder, but a separate diagnosis is not given unless the social
 communication deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations.