Antisocial Personality Disorder Diagnostic Criteria A. A pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others, occurring since age 15 years, as indicated by three (or more) of the following: 1. Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors, as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest. 2. Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for personal profit or pleasure. 3. Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead. 4. Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults. 5. Reckless disregard for safety of self or others. 6. Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations. 7. Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another. B. The individual is at least age 18 years. C. There is evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years. D. The occurrence of antisocial behavior is not exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Diagnostic Features The essential feature of antisocial personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights of others that begins in childhood or early adolescence and continues into adulthood. This pattern has also been referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy, or dyssocial personality disorder. Because deceit and manipulation are central features of antisocial personality disorder, it may be especially helpful to integrate information acquired from systematic clinical assessment with information collected from collateral sources. 749 For this diagnosis to be given, the individual must be at least age 18 years (Criterion B) and must have had evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years (Criterion C). Conduct disorder involves a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated. The specific behaviors characteristic of conduct disorder fall into one of four categories: aggression to people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, or serious violation of rules. The pattern of antisocial behavior continues into adulthood. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder fail to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behavior (Criterion A1). They may repeatedly perform acts that are grounds for arrest (whether they are arrested or not), such as destroying property, harassing others, stealing, or pursuing illegal occupations. Persons with this disorder disregard the wishes, rights, or feelings of others. They are frequently deceitful and manipulative in order to gain personal profit or pleasure (e.g., to obtain money, sex, or power) (Criterion A2). They may repeatedly lie, use an alias, con others, or malinger. A pattern of impulsivity may be manifested by a failure to plan ahead (Criterion A3). Decisions are made on the spur of the moment, without forethought and without consideration for the consequences to self or others; this may lead to sudden changes of jobs, residences, or relationships. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder tend to be irritable and aggressive and may repeatedly get into physical fights or commit acts of physical assault (including spouse beating or child beating) (Criterion A4). (Aggressive acts that are required to defend oneself or someone else are not considered to be evidence for this item.) These individuals also display a reckless disregard for the safety of themselves or others (Criterion A5). This may be evidenced in their driving behavior (i.e., recurrent speeding, driving while intoxicated, multiple accidents). They may engage in sexual behavior or substance use that has a high risk for harmful consequences. They may neglect or fail to care for a child in a way that puts the child in danger. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder also tend to be consistently and extremely irresponsible (Criterion A6). Irresponsible work behavior may be indicated by significant periods of unemployment despite available job opportunities, or by abandonment of several jobs without a realistic plan for getting another job. There may also be a pattern of repeated absences from work that are not explained by illness either in themselves or in their family. Financial irresponsibility is indicated by acts such as defaulting on debts, failing to provide child support, or failing to support other dependents on a regular basis. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder show little remorse for the consequences of their acts (Criterion A7). They may be indifferent to, or provide a superficial rationalization for, having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from someone (e.g., “life’s unfair,” “losers deserve to lose”). These individuals may blame the victims for being foolish, helpless, or deserving their fate (e.g., “he had it coming anyway”); they may minimize the harmful consequences of their actions; or they may simply indicate complete indifference. They generally fail to compensate or make amends for their behavior. They may believe that everyone is out to “help number one” and that one should stop at nothing to avoid being pushed around. The antisocial behavior must not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder (Criterion D). Associated Features Individuals with antisocial personality disorder frequently lack empathy and tend to be callous, cynical, and contemptuous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others. They may have an inflated and arrogant self-appraisal (e.g., feel that ordinary work is beneath them or lack a realistic concern about their current problems or their future) and may be excessively opinionated, self-assured, or cocky. Some antisocial individuals may display a glib, superficial charm and can be quite voluble and verbally facile (e.g., using technical terms or jargon that might impress someone who is unfamiliar with the topic). Lack of 750 empathy, inflated self-appraisal, and superficial charm are features that have been commonly included in traditional conceptions of psychopathy that may be particularly distinguishing of the disorder and more predictive of recidivism in prison or forensic settings, where criminal, delinquent, or aggressive acts are likely to be nonspecific. These individuals may also be irresponsible and exploitative in their sexual relationships. They may have a history of many sexual partners and may never have sustained a monogamous relationship. They may be irresponsible as parents, as evidenced by malnutrition of a child, an illness in the child resulting from a lack of minimal hygiene, a child’s dependence on neighbors or nonresident relatives for food or shelter, a failure to arrange for a caretaker for a young child when the individual is away from home, or repeated squandering of money required for household necessities. These individuals may receive dishonorable discharges from the armed services, may fail to be self- supporting, may become impoverished or even homeless, or may spend many years in penal institutions. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder are more likely than individuals in the general population to die prematurely from natural causes and suicide. Prevalence The estimated prevalence of antisocial personality disorder based on a probability subsample from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 0.6%.The prevalence of antisocial personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions data was 3.6%. A review of seven epidemiological studies (six in the United States) found a median prevalence of 3.6%. The highest prevalence of antisocial personality disorder (greater than 70%) is among samples of men with the most severe alcohol use disorders and from substance abuse clinics, prisons, or other forensic settings. Lifetime prevalence appears to be similar across non-Latinx White and Black individuals and lower in Latinx and Asian Americans. Prevalence may be higher in samples affected by adverse socioeconomic (i.e., poverty) or sociocultural (i.e., migration) factors. Environmental. Genetic and physiological. Development and Course Antisocial personality disorder has a chronic course but may become less evident or remit as the individual grows older, often by age 40. Although this remission tends to be particularly evident with respect to engaging in criminal behavior, there is likely to be a decrease in the full spectrum of antisocial behaviors and substance use. By definition, antisocial personality cannot be diagnosed before age 18 years. Risk and Prognostic Factors Child abuse or neglect, unstable or erratic parenting, or inconsistent parental discipline may increase the likelihood that conduct disorder will evolve into antisocial personality disorder. Antisocial personality disorder is more common among the first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population. Biological relatives of individuals with this disorder are also at increased risk for somatization disorder (a diagnosis that was replaced in DSM-5 with somatic symptom disorder) and substance use disorders. Within a family that has a member with antisocial personality disorder, males more often have antisocial personality disorder and substance use disorders, whereas females more often have somatization disorder. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues Antisocial personality disorder has been associated with low socioeconomic status and urban settings. The diagnosis may at times be misapplied to individuals in settings in which 751 seemingly antisocial behavior may be part of a protective survival strategy (e.g., formation of youth gangs in urban areas with high rates of violence and discrimination). Sociocultural contexts with high rates of child maltreatment or exposure to violence also tend to have elevated prevalence of antisocial behaviors, suggesting either a potential risk factor for the development of antisocial personality disorder or an adverse environment that evokes reactive and contextual antisocial behaviors that do not represent pervasive and enduring traits consistent with a personality disorder. In assessing antisocial traits, it is helpful for the clinician to consider the social and economic context in which the behaviors occur. In the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions, prevalence appears to vary across U.S. ethnic and racialized groups, possibly because of a combination of true prevalence differences, measurement artifacts, and the impact of adverse environments that generate behaviors that resemble those of antisocial personality disorder but are instead reactive and contextual. Individuals from some socially oppressed groups may be at higher risk for misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of antisocial personality disorder because they are more likely to be misdiagnosed with conduct disorder in adolescence, which is a requirement for a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Antisocial personality disorder is three times as common in men than in women. Women with Substance use disorders. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorders. Other personality disorders. antisocial personality disorder are more likely to have experienced childhood and adult adverse experiences such as sexual abuse compared with men. Clinical presentation may vary, with men more often presenting with irritability/aggression and reckless disregard for the safety of others compared with women. Comorbid substance use disorders are more common in men, while comorbid mood and anxiety disorders are more common in women. There has been some concern that antisocial personality disorder may be underdiagnosed in females, particularly because of the emphasis on aggressive items in the definition of conduct disorder. Differential Diagnosis The diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not given to individuals younger than 18 years and is given only if there is evidence of conduct disorder before age 15 years. For individuals older than 18 years, a diagnosis of conduct disorder is given only if the criteria for antisocial personality disorder are not met. When antisocial behavior in an adult is associated with a substance use disorder, the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not made unless the signs of antisocial personality disorder were also present in childhood and have continued into adulthood. When substance use and antisocial behavior both began in childhood and continued into adulthood, both a substance use disorder and antisocial personality disorder should be diagnosed if the criteria for both are met, even though some antisocial acts may be a consequence of the substance use disorder (e.g., illegal selling of drugs, thefts to obtain money for drugs). Antisocial behavior that occurs exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or a bipolar disorder should not be diagnosed as antisocial personality disorder. Other personality disorders may be confused with antisocial personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to antisocial personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and lack empathy. However, 752 narcissistic personality disorder does not include characteristics of impulsivity, aggression, and deceit. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality disorder may not be as needy of the admiration and envy of others, and persons with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the history of conduct disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons with histrionic personality disorder tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not characteristically engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with histrionic and borderline personality disorders are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial personality disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder tend to be less emotionally unstable and more aggressive than those with borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial behavior may be Criminal behavior not associated with a mental disorder. F60.3 present in some individuals with paranoid personality disorder, it is not usually motivated by a desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder, but rather is more often attributable to a desire for revenge. Antisocial personality disorder must be distinguished from antisocial behavior not due to a mental disorder, for example, criminal behavior undertaken for gain that is not accompanied by the personality features characteristic of this disorder. In these cases, the condition adult antisocial behavior may be coded (see “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”). Comorbidity Individuals with antisocial personality disorder may also experience dysphoria, including complaints of tension, inability to tolerate boredom, and depressed mood. They may have associated anxiety disorders, mood disorders, substance use disorders, somatic symptom disorder, and gambling disorder. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder also often have personality features that meet criteria for other personality disorders, particularly borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders. The likelihood of developing antisocial personality disorder in adult life is increased if the individual experienced childhood onset of conduct disorder (before age 10 years) and accompanying attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.