Narcissistic Personality Disorder F60.81 Diagnostic Criteria A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following: 1. Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents, expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate achievements). 2. Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love. 3. Believes that he or she is “special” and unique and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions). 4. Requires excessive admiration. 5. Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations). 6. Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own ends). 7. Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others. 8. Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her. 9. Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes. 761 Diagnostic Features The essential feature of narcissistic personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy that begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. Individuals with this disorder have a grandiose sense of self-importance, which may be manifest as an exaggerated or unrealistic sense of superiority, value, or capability (Criterion 1). They tend to overestimate their abilities and amplify their accomplishments, often appearing boastful and pretentious. They may blithely assume that others attribute the same value to their efforts and may be surprised when the praise they expect and feel they deserve is not forthcoming. Often implicit in the inflated judgments of their own accomplishments is an underestimation or devaluation of the contributions of others. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder are often preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love (Criterion 2). They may ruminate about “long overdue” admiration and privilege and compare themselves favorably with famous or privileged people. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder believe that they are special or unique and expect others to recognize them as such (Criterion 3). They can be surprised or even devastated when the recognition of acclaim they expect and feel they deserve from others is not forthcoming. They may feel that they can only be understood by, and should only associate with, people of high status and may attribute “unique,” “perfect,” or “gifted” qualities to those with whom they associate. Individuals with this disorder believe that their needs are special and beyond the ken of ordinary people. Their own self-esteem is enhanced (i.e., “mirrored”) by the idealized value that they assign to those with whom they associate. They are likely to insist on having only the “top” person (doctor, lawyer, hairdresser, instructor) or being affiliated with the “best” institutions but may devalue the credentials of those who disappoint them. Individuals with this disorder generally require excessive admiration (Criterion 4). Their self- esteem is almost invariably very fragile, and their struggle with severe internal self-doubt, self- criticism, and emptiness results in their need to actively seek others’ admiration. They may be preoccupied with how well they are doing and how favorably they are regarded by others. They may expect their arrival to be greeted with great fanfare and are astonished if others do not covet their possessions. They may constantly fish for compliments, often with great charm. A sense of entitlement, which is rooted in their distorted sense of self-worth, is evident in these individuals’ unreasonable expectation of especially favorable treatment (Criterion 5). They expect to be catered to and are puzzled or furious when this does not happen. For example, they may assume that they do not have to wait in line and that their priorities are so important that others should defer to them, and then get irritated when others fail to assist “in their very important work.” They expect to be given whatever they want or feel they need, no matter what it might mean to others. For example, these individuals may expect great dedication from others and may overwork them without regard for the impact on their lives. This sense of entitlement, combined with a lack of understanding and sensitivity to the wants and needs of others, may result in the conscious or unwitting exploitation of others (Criterion 6). They tend to form friendships or romantic relationships only if the other person seems likely to advance their purposes or otherwise enhance their self-esteem. They often usurp special privileges and extra resources that they believe they deserve. Some individuals with narcissistic personality disorder intentionally and purposefully take advantage of others emotionally, socially, intellectually, or financially for their own purposes and gains. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder generally have a lack of empathy and are unwilling to recognize or identify with the desires, subjective experiences, and feelings of others (Criterion 7). They tend to have some degree of cognitive empathy 762 (understanding another person’s perspective on an intellectual level) but lack emotional empathy (directly feeling the emotions that another person is feeling). These individuals may be oblivious to the hurt their remarks may inflict (e.g., exuberantly telling a former lover that “I am now in the relationship of a lifetime!”; boasting of health in front of someone who is sick). When recognized, the needs, desires, or feelings of others are likely to be viewed disparagingly as signs of weakness or vulnerability. Those who relate to individuals with narcissistic personality disorder typically find an emotional coldness and lack of reciprocal interest. These individuals are often envious of others or believe that others are envious of them (Criterion 8). They may begrudge others their successes or possessions, feeling that they better deserve those achievements, admiration, or privileges. They may harshly devalue the contributions of others, particularly when those individuals have received acknowledgment or praise for their accomplishments. Arrogant, haughty behaviors characterize these individuals; they often display snobbish, disdainful, or patronizing attitudes (Criterion 9). Associated Features Vulnerability in self-esteem makes individuals with narcissistic personality disorder very sensitive to criticism or defeat. Although they may not show it outwardly, such experiences may leave them feeling ashamed, humiliated, degraded, hollow, and empty. They may react with disdain, rage, or defiant counterattack. However, such experiences can also lead to social withdrawal or an appearance of humility that may mask and protect the grandiosity. Interpersonal relations are typically impaired because of problems related to self-preoccupation, entitlement, need for admiration, and relative disregard for the sensitivities of others. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder can be competent and high functioning with professional and social success, while others can have various levels of functional impairment. Professional capability combined with self-control, stoicism, and interpersonal distancing with minimal self-disclosure can support sustained life engagement and even enable marriage and social affiliations. Sometimes ambition and temporary confidence lead to high achievements, but performance can be disrupted because of fluctuating self-confidence and intolerance of criticism or defeat. Some individuals with narcissistic personality disorder have very low vocational functioning, reflecting an unwillingness to take a risk in competitive or other situations in which failure or defeat can be possible. Low self-esteem with inferiority, vulnerability, and sustained feelings of shame, envy, and humiliation accompanied by self-criticism and insecurity can make individuals with narcissistic personality disorder susceptible to social withdrawal, emptiness, and depressed mood. High perfectionist standards are often associated with significant fear of exposure to imperfection, failure, and overwhelming emotions. Prevalence The estimated prevalence of narcissistic personality disorder based on a probability subsample from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 0.0%.The prevalence of narcissistic personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions data was 6.2%. A review of five epidemiological studies (four in the United States) found a median prevalence of 1.6%. Development and Course Narcissistic traits may be particularly common in adolescents but do not necessarily indicate that the individual will develop narcissistic personality disorder in adulthood. Predominant narcissistic traits or manifestations of the full disorder may first come to clinical attention or be exacerbated in the context of unexpected or extremely challenging life 763 experiences or crises, such as bankruptcies, demotions or loss of work, or divorces. In addition, individuals with narcissistic personality disorder may have specific difficulties adjusting to the onset of physical and occupational limitations that are inherent in the aging process. However, life experiences, such as new durable relationships, real successful achievements, and tolerable disappointments and setbacks, can all be corrective and contribute to changes and improvements in individuals with this disorder. Other personality disorders and personality traits. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues Narcissistic traits may be elevated in sociocultural contexts that emphasize individualism and personal autonomy over collectivistic goals. Compared with collectivistic contexts, in individualistic contexts, narcissistic traits may warrant less clinical attention or less frequently lead to social impairment. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Among adults age 18 and older diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder, 50%–75% are men. Gender differences in adults with this disorder include stronger reactivity in response to stress and compromised empathic processing in men as opposed to self-focus and withdrawal in women. Culturally based gender patterns and expectations may also contribute to gender differences in narcissistic personality disorder traits and patterns. Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior In the context of severe stress, and given the perfectionism often associated with narcissistic personality disorder, exposure to imperfection, failure, and overwhelming emotions can evoke suicidal ideation. Suicide attempts in individuals with narcissistic personality disorder tend to be less impulsive and are characterized by higher lethality compared with suicide attempts by individuals with other personality disorders. Differential Diagnosis Other personality disorders may be confused with narcissistic personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to narcissistic personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. The most useful feature in discriminating narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders, in which the interactive styles are coquettish, callous, and needy, respectively, is the grandiosity characteristic of narcissistic personality disorder. The relative stability of self-image and self-control as well as the relative lack of self-destructiveness, impulsivity, separation insecurity, and emotional hyperreactivity also help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from borderline personality disorder. Excessive pride in achievements, a relative lack of emotional display, and ignorance of or disdain for others’ sensitivities help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic personality disorder. Although individuals with borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders may require much attention, those with narcissistic personality disorder specifically need that attention to be admiring. Individuals with antisocial and narcissistic personality disorders share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and unempathic. However, narcissistic personality disorder does not necessarily include characteristics of impulsive aggressivity and deceitfulness. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality disorder may be more indifferent and less sensitive to others’ reactions or criticism, and individuals with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the history of conduct disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. Mania or hypomania. Substance use disorders. Persistent depressive disorder. F60.6 764 In both narcissistic personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the individual may profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do things as well. However, while those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder tend to be more immersed in perfectionism related to order and rigidity, individuals with narcissistic personality disorder tend to set high perfectionistic standards, especially for appearance and performance, and to be critically concerned if they are not measuring up. Suspiciousness and social withdrawal usually distinguish those with schizotypal, avoidant, or paranoid personality disorder from those with narcissistic personality disorder. When these qualities are present in individuals with narcissistic personality disorder, they derive primarily from shame and fear of failure, or fear of having imperfections or flaws revealed. Many highly successful individuals display personality traits that might be considered narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute narcissistic personality disorder. Grandiosity may emerge as part of manic or hypomanic episodes, but the association with mood change or functional impairments helps distinguish these episodes from narcissistic personality disorder. Narcissistic personality disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use. Experiences that threaten self-esteem can evoke a deep sense of inferiority and sustained feelings of shame, envy, self-criticism, and insecurity in individuals with narcissistic personality disorder that can result in persistent negative feelings resembling those seen in persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are also met for persistent depressive disorder, both conditions can be diagnosed. Comorbidity Narcissistic personality disorder is associated with depressive disorders (persistent depressive disorder and major depressive disorder), anorexia nervosa, and substance use disorders (especially related to cocaine). Histrionic, borderline, antisocial, and paranoid personality disorders may also be associated with narcissistic personality disorder.