 Tobacco Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of tobacco use leading to clinically significant impairment
 or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12
month period:
 1. Tobacco is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
 intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 tobacco use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain or use tobacco.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco.
 5. Recurrent tobacco use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
 work, school, or home (e.g., interference with work).
 6. Continued tobacco use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of tobacco (e.g.,
 arguments with others about tobacco use).
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of tobacco use.
 8. Recurrent tobacco use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
 smoking in bed).
 9. Tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by tobacco.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of tobacco to achieve the desired
 effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 tobacco.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for tobacco (refer to Criteria A
 and B of the criteria set for tobacco withdrawal).
 b. Tobacco (or a closely related substance, such as nicotine) is taken to
 relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
 Specify if:
646
 In early remission: After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met for at least 3
 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
 “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met at
 any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
 A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 On maintenance therapy: The individual is taking a long-term maintenance
 medication, such as nicotine replacement medication, and no criteria for tobacco
 use disorder have been met for that class of medication (except tolerance to, or
 withdrawal from, the nicotine replacement medication).
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to tobacco is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If a tobacco withdrawal or tobacco
induced sleep disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for tobacco use
 disorder. Instead, the comorbid tobacco use disorder is indicated in the 4th character
 of the tobacco-induced disorder code (see the coding note for tobacco withdrawal or
 tobacco-induced sleep disorder). For example, if there is comorbid tobacco-induced
 sleep disorder and tobacco use disorder, only the tobacco-induced sleep disorder
 code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid tobacco use
 disorder is moderate or severe: F17.208 for moderate or severe tobacco use
 disorder with tobacco-induced sleep disorder. It is not permissible to code a
 comorbid mild tobacco use disorder with a tobacco-induced sleep disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 Z72.0 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F17.200 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F17.201 Moderate, In early remission
 F17.201 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F17.200 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F17.201 Severe, In early remission
 F17.201 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 “On maintenance therapy” applies as a specifier to be added to “in remission” if the individual is
 both in remission and on maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environment” applies as a further
 specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e.,
 in early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained remission in a controlled
environment). Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails,
 therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Diagnostic Features
 Tobacco use disorder can develop with use of all forms of tobacco (e.g., cigarettes, chewing
 tobacco, snuff, pipes, cigars, electronic nicotine delivery devices such as electronic cigarettes [e
cigarettes]) and with prescription nicotine-containing medications (nicotine gum and patch). The
 relative ability of these products to produce tobacco use disorder or to induce withdrawal is
 associated with the rapidity of the route of administration (smoked over oral over transdermal)
 and the nicotine content of the product. The name of this substance category was changed from
 “nicotine” in prior editions of DSM to “tobacco” in DSM-5 on the basis of harms from addiction
 being associated mostly with tobacco and much less with nicotine.
 Tobacco use disorder is common among individuals who use cigarettes and smokeless
 tobacco daily, is less common among individuals who use e-cigarettes, and is uncommon
 647
 among those who do not use tobacco daily or use nicotine medications. Tolerance to tobacco
 is exemplified by the disappearance of nausea and dizziness after intake and by a more intense
 effect of tobacco the first time it is used during the day. Cessation of tobacco use can produce a
 well-defined withdrawal syndrome. Many individuals with tobacco use disorder use tobacco to
 relieve or to avoid withdrawal symptoms (e.g., after being in a situation where use is restricted).
 Many individuals with tobacco use disorder have tobacco-related physical symptoms or diseases
 and continue to smoke. The large majority report craving when they do not smoke for several
 hours. Spending excessive time using tobacco can be exemplified by chain-smoking (i.e.,
 smoking one cigarette after another with no time between cigarettes). Because tobacco sources
 are readily and legally available, and because tobacco intoxication is very rare, spending a great
 deal of time attempting to procure tobacco or recovering from its effects is uncommon. Giving
 up important social, occupational, or recreational activities can occur when an individual forgoes
 an activity because it occurs in tobacco use–restricted areas. Use of tobacco rarely results in
 failure to fulfill major role obligations (e.g., interference with work or home responsibilities), but
 persistent social or interpersonal problems (e.g., having arguments with others about tobacco use,
 avoiding social situations because of others’ disapproval of tobacco use) or use that is physically
 hazardous (e.g., smoking in bed, smoking around flammable chemicals) occur at an intermediate
 prevalence. Although these criteria are less often endorsed by tobacco users, if endorsed, they
 can indicate a more severe disorder.
 Associated Features
 Smoking within 30 minutes of waking, smoking daily, smoking more cigarettes per day, and
 waking at night to smoke are associated with tobacco use disorder. Environmental cues can
 evoke craving and withdrawal. Serious medical conditions often occur, including lung and other
 cancers, cardiac and pulmonary disease, perinatal problems, cough, shortness of breath, and
 accelerated skin aging.
Prevalence
 Although cigarettes are the most commonly used tobacco product, use of other tobacco products
 (especially e-cigarettes) has become more common. In the United States, 19% of adults used a
 tobacco product in the last year, 19% used more than one product, 14% used cigarettes, 4% used
 cigars, 3% used e-cigarettes, and 2% used smokeless tobacco. One fourth (24%) of current U.S.
 smokers are nondaily smokers.
 The 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 tobacco use disorder in the United States in 2012–2013
 was 20% among adults age 18 years and older and 29.6% among Native Americans, 22.3%
 among non-Latinx Whites, 20.1% among African Americans, 12.2% among Latinx, and 11.2%
 among Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. Prevalence was higher among men; those who
 were young, unmarried, less educated, poor, or residing in the southern United States; and those
 with almost any psychiatric disorder. The prevalence among current daily smokers is
 approximately 50%.
 Global comparisons show that in all geographic regions of the world, the age-standardized
 prevalence of daily tobacco smoking is higher in men than in women, but the gender ratio varies
 greatly, from 16.9:1 in East Asia to 1.2:1 in Australasia.
 Development and Course
 About 20% of U.S. high school seniors report having ever smoked cigarettes, and about 5% have
 used in the past 30 days. Among adolescents who smoke cigarettes at least monthly, most of
 these individuals will become daily tobacco users in the future. Initiation of smoking after age 21
 years is rare. Some of the tobacco use disorder criteria symptoms (e.g., craving) occur soon after
 beginning tobacco use, suggesting the addiction process begins with initial use; however,
 fulfilling DSM criteria usually occurs over several years.
 648
 Nondaily smoking has become more prevalent since the late 1990s in the United States,
 especially among individuals ages 18–34 years, Blacks, Hispanics, and individuals with at least a
 college education.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Individuals with externalizing personality traits are more likely to initiate
 tobacco use. Children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or conduct disorder, and
 adults with depressive, bipolar, anxiety, personality, psychotic, or other substance use disorders,
 are at higher risk for starting and continuing tobacco use and of tobacco use disorder.
 Environmental.
 Persons with low incomes and low educational levels are more likely to initiate
 tobacco use and are less likely to stop.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Genetic factors contribute to the onset of tobacco use, the continuation
 of tobacco use, and the development of tobacco use disorder, with a degree of heritability
 equivalent to that observed with other substance use disorders (i.e., about 50%). Some of this
 risk is specific to tobacco, and some is common with the vulnerability to developing any
 substance use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Acceptance of tobacco use varies across cultural contexts. Age-standardized prevalence of daily
 tobacco smoking varies greatly by geographic region, ranging from 4.7% in Western Sub
Saharan Africa to 24.2% in Eastern Europe. The degree to which these geographic differences
 are the result of income, education, and tobacco control activities in a country is unclear.
 Prevalence of tobacco use in the United States varies by age, gender, and ethnoracial
 background, with lower rates of smoking onset and progression to daily smoking among Black
 youth, especially young women. Liver enzyme polymorphisms that vary across ethnoracial
 groups can affect nicotine metabolism, contributing to variation in smoking behavior. Higher
 tobacco use disorder prevalence is also associated with exposure to racism and ethnic
 discrimination. Prevalence of DSM-IV nicotine dependence is higher among adult lesbian, gay,
 and bisexual individuals than among heterosexuals, possibly also due to an association with
 exposure to sexual orientation–related discrimination. Among individuals with DSM-IV nicotine
 dependence, lower income and education are associated with disorder persistence.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The ratio of men to women among U.S. smokers is approximately 1.4:1 and has been stable
 between 2004 and 2014. This ratio is generally consistent across various income and educational
 levels. The ratio diminishes in older age groups as fewer men are smoking as age increases. The
 literature from several U.S. settings suggests that negative reinforcement (i.e., that smoking
 relieves negative affect) is a greater motivator in women than in men. Menstrual cycle effects on
 smoking are found inconsistently, but tobacco withdrawal appears worse in the luteal than the
 follicular phase of the cycle. Pregnant females smoke at a lower rate than nonpregnant females
 but relapse back to smoking rapidly after delivery.
 Diagnostic Markers
 The following biomarkers can be used to measure the extent of tobacco or nicotine use: carbon
 monoxide in the breath and nicotine and its metabolite cotinine in blood, saliva, or urine;
 however, these are only weakly associated with tobacco use disorder.
 649
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 National U.S. survey data show that past-year cigarette use is associated with a two- to threefold
 increased risk of suicidal thoughts and behavior, with earlier age at first tobacco use increasing
 risk. Evidence from the U.S. Veterans Health Administration shows that even after adjustment
 for covariates, tobacco use disorder is associated with an increased risk of suicide. A large study
 of twins in Finland found that the relationship between tobacco use and suicide increased in a
 dose-response manner, and that for identical twins discordant for tobacco use, tobacco use was
 associated with a sixfold increased risk for suicide.
 Functional Consequences of Tobacco Use Disorder
 Medical consequences of tobacco use often begin when tobacco users are in their 40s and usually
F17.203
 become progressively more debilitating over time. One-half of smokers who do not stop using
 tobacco will die early from a tobacco-related illness, and smoking-related morbidity occurs in
 more than one-half of tobacco users. Most medical conditions result from exposure to carbon
 monoxide, tars, and other non-nicotine components of tobacco. The major predictor of
 reversibility is duration of smoking. Secondhand smoke increases the risk of heart disease and
 cancer by 30%. Long-term use of nicotine medications does not appear to cause medical harm.
 Comorbidity
 The most common medical conditions from smoking are cardiovascular illnesses, chronic
 obstructive pulmonary disease, and cancers. Smoking also increases perinatal problems, such as
 low birth weight and miscarriage. Prevalence of smoking is almost twice as high in individuals
 with major depressive disorder; although the prevalence of smoking in the United States is
 higher among individuals with low socioeconomic status, the increased prevalence of smoking
 among those with depression is independent of socioeconomic status. The most common
 psychiatric comorbidities associated with smoking are alcohol and other substance, depressive,
 bipolar, anxiety, personality, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders. In the United States,
 individuals with a psychiatric disorder are three times more likely than others to have tobacco
 use disorder. Adults with DSM-5 tobacco use disorder are significantly more likely than other
 adults to have comorbid psychiatric disorders, including other DSM-5 substance use disorders,
 major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder,
 posttraumatic stress disorder, and borderline and antisocial personality disorders.