Tobacco Withdrawal
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Daily use of tobacco for at least several weeks.
 B. Abrupt cessation of tobacco use, or reduction in the amount of tobacco used,
 followed within 24 hours by four (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
 1. Irritability, frustration, or anger.
 2. Anxiety.
 3. Difficulty concentrating.
 4. Increased appetite.
 5. Restlessness.
 6. Depressed mood.
 7. Insomnia.
 650
 C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributed to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
 withdrawal from another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code for tobacco withdrawal is F17.203. Note that the
 ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate or severe tobacco
 use disorder, reflecting the fact that tobacco withdrawal can only occur in the
 presence of a moderate or severe tobacco use disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 Withdrawal symptoms impair the ability to stop tobacco use. The symptoms after abstinence
 from tobacco are in large part due to nicotine deprivation. Tobacco withdrawal is common
 among daily tobacco users who stop or reduce their use of tobacco. Symptoms are more intense
 among individuals who smoke cigarettes and also use smokeless tobacco or electronic cigarettes
 daily. This symptom intensity is likely attributable to the more rapid onset and higher levels of
 nicotine with cigarette smoking. Significant withdrawal among those who are nondaily cigarette
 users or use only nicotine medications is uncommon.
 Typically, heart rate decreases by 5–12 bpm in the first few days after stopping smoking, and
 weight increases an average of 4–7 lb (2–3 kg) over the first year after stopping smoking.
 Tobacco withdrawal can produce clinically significant mood changes and functional impairment.
 Because of conditioning effects, withdrawal can be prompted by environmental cues such as
 seeing others smoking. Gradual reduction of tobacco decreases the severity of withdrawal.
 Associated Features
 Craving for tobacco or nicotine is very common during abstinence and has a large effect on the
 ability to remain abstinent. Abstinence can increase impulsivity and anhedonia and can decrease
 positive affect. Abstinence from tobacco or nicotine also appears to increase craving for sweet or
 sugary foods and impairs performance on tasks requiring vigilance. Smoking increases the
 metabolism of many medications used to treat mental disorders; thus, cessation of smoking can
 increase the blood levels of these medications, and this can produce clinically significant
 outcomes. This effect appears to be due not to nicotine but rather to other compounds in tobacco.
 Prevalence
 Approximately 50% of daily smokers who quit for 2 or more days will have four or more
 symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. The most commonly endorsed signs and symptoms are
 anxiety, irritability, and difficulty concentrating. The least commonly endorsed symptoms are
 depression and insomnia.
 Development and Course
 Tobacco withdrawal usually begins within 24 hours of stopping or cutting down tobacco use,
 peaks at 2–3 days after abstinence, and usually lasts 2–3 weeks. Tobacco withdrawal symptoms
 can occur among adolescent tobacco users, even prior to daily tobacco use. Prolonged symptoms
 beyond 1 month can occur but are uncommon.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Smokers with depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders,
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and other substance use disorders have more severe
 withdrawal.
 651
 Genetic and physiological.
 Genotype can influence the probability of withdrawal upon abstinence.
 Diagnostic Markers
 The following biomarkers can be used to measure the extent of tobacco or nicotine use but are
 only weakly associated with tobacco withdrawal: carbon monoxide in the breath and nicotine
 and its metabolite cotinine in blood, saliva, or urine.
 Functional Consequences of Tobacco Withdrawal
 Tobacco withdrawal can cause significant distress and difficulty functioning in a minority of
 smokers, but this may be uncommon. Withdrawal impairs the ability to stop or control tobacco
 use. Whether tobacco withdrawal can prompt the development of a new mental disorder or
 recurrence of a mental disorder is debatable, but if this occurs, it would be in a small minority of
 tobacco users.
 Differential Diagnosis
 The symptoms of tobacco withdrawal overlap with those of other substance withdrawal
 syndromes (e.g., alcohol withdrawal; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; stimulant
 withdrawal; caffeine withdrawal; opioid withdrawal); caffeine intoxication; anxiety, depressive,
 bipolar, and sleep disorders; and medication-induced akathisia. Admission to smoke-free
 inpatient units or voluntary smoking cessation can induce withdrawal symptoms that mimic,
 intensify, or disguise other disorders or adverse effects of medications used to treat mental
 disorders (e.g., irritability thought to be due to alcohol withdrawal could be due to tobacco
 withdrawal). Reduction in symptoms with the use of nicotine confirms the diagnosis.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of tobacco withdrawal with tobacco use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
 under Tobacco Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
 encountered.
 Tobacco-Induced Mental Disorders
 Tobacco-induced sleep disorder is discussed in the chapter “Sleep-Wake Disorders” (see
 “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder”)