Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
 Trauma- and stressor-related disorders include disorders in which
 exposure to a traumatic or stressful event is listed explicitly as a diagnostic criterion. These
 include reactive attachment disorder, disinhibited social engagement disorder, posttraumatic
 stress disorder (PTSD), acute stress disorder, adjustment disorders, and prolonged grief disorder.
 Placement of this chapter reflects the close relationship between these diagnoses and disorders in
 the surrounding chapters on anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, and
 dissociative disorders.
 Psychological distress following exposure to a traumatic or stressful event is quite variable.
 In some cases, symptoms can be well understood within an anxiety- or fear-based context. It is
 clear, however, that many individuals who have been exposed to a traumatic or stressful event
 exhibit a phenotype in which, rather than anxiety- or fear-based symptoms, the most prominent
 clinical characteristics are anhedonic and dysphoric symptoms, externalizing angry and
 aggressive symptoms, or dissociative symptoms. Because of these variable expressions of
 clinical distress following exposure to catastrophic or aversive events, the aforementioned
 disorders are grouped under a separate category: trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
 Furthermore, it is not uncommon for the clinical picture to include some combination of the
 above symptoms (with or without anxiety- or fear-based symptoms). Such a heterogeneous
 picture has long been recognized in adjustment disorders, as well. Social neglect—that is, the
 absence of adequate caregiving during childhood—is a diagnostic requirement of both reactive
 attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder. Although the two disorders
 share a common etiology, the former is expressed as an internalizing disorder with depressive
 symptoms and withdrawn behavior, while the latter is marked by disinhibition and externalizing
 behavior. Finally, it has long been recognized that whereas grief, despair, and general dysphoria
 can be a part of the normal grieving process after the death of a loved one, the expression of such
 emotions is sometimes abnormally excessive in duration and/or intensity. The diagnosis of
 prolonged grief disorder has been introduced in this chapter to meet this clinical concern