 Prolonged Grief Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The death, at least 12 months ago, of a person who was close to the bereaved
individual (for children and adolescents, at least 6 months ago).
 323
 B. Since the death, the development of a persistent grief response characterized by
 one or both of the following symptoms, which have been present most days to a
 clinically significant degree. In addition, the symptom(s) has occurred nearly
 every day for at least the last month:
 1. Intense yearning/longing for the deceased person.
 2. Preoccupation with thoughts or memories of the deceased person (in children
 and adolescents, preoccupation may focus on the circumstances of the
 death).
 C. Since the death, at least three of the following symptoms have been present
 most days to a clinically significant degree. In addition, the symptoms have
 occurred nearly every day for at least the last month:
 1. Identity disruption (e.g., feeling as though part of oneself has died) since the
 death.
 2. Marked sense of disbelief about the death.
 3. Avoidance of reminders that the person is dead (in children and adolescents,
 may be characterized by efforts to avoid reminders).
 4. Intense emotional pain (e.g., anger, bitterness, sorrow) related to the death.
 5. Difficulty reintegrating into one’s relationships and activities after the death
 (e.g., problems engaging with friends, pursuing interests, or planning for the
 future).
 6. Emotional numbness (absence or marked reduction of emotional experience)
 as a result of the death.
 7. Feeling that life is meaningless as a result of the death.
 8. Intense loneliness as a result of the death.
 D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 E. The duration and severity of the bereavement reaction clearly exceed expected
 social, cultural, or religious norms for the individual’s culture and context.
 F. The symptoms are not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
 major depressive disorder or posttraumatic stress disorder, and are not
 attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., medication, alcohol)
 or another medical condition.
 Diagnostic Features
 Prolonged grief disorder represents a prolonged maladaptive grief reaction that can be diagnosed
 only after at least 12 months (6 months in children and adolescents) have elapsed since the death
 of someone with whom the bereaved had a close relationship (Criterion A). Although in general
this time frame reliably discriminates normal grief from grief that continues to be severe and
 impairing, the duration of adaptive grief may vary individually and cross-culturally. The
 condition involves the development of a persistent grief response characterized by intense
 yearning or longing for the deceased person (often with intense sorrow and frequent crying) or
 preoccupation with thoughts or memories of the deceased, although in children and adolescents,
 this preoccupation may focus on the circumstances of the death. The intense yearning/longing or
 the preoccupation has been present most days to a clinically significant degree and has occurred
 nearly every day for at least the last month (Criterion B). Moreover, since the death, at least three
 additional symptoms have been present most days to a clinically significant degree and have
 occurred nearly every day for at least the past month. These symptoms include identity
 disruption since the death (e.g., feeling as though part of oneself has died) (Criterion C1); a
 marked sense of disbelief about the death (Criterion C2); avoidance of reminders that the person
 is dead, which in children and adolescents may be characterized by efforts to avoid reminders
 (Criterion C3); intense emotional pain (e.g., anger, bitterness, guilt) since the death (Criterion
 C4); having difficulty reintegrating into personal relationships and activities since the death (e.g.,
 problems
 324
 engaging with friends, pursuing interests, or planning for the future) (Criterion C5); emotional
 numbness (absence or marked reduction of emotional experience) as a result of the death
 (Criterion C6); feeling that life is meaningless as a result of the death (Criterion C7); or intense
 loneliness as a consequence of the death (Criterion C8).
 The symptoms of prolonged grief disorder must result in clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning in the bereaved
 individual (Criterion D). The nature, duration, and severity of the bereavement reaction must
 clearly exceed expected social, cultural, or religious norms for the individual’s culture and
 context (Criterion E). Although there are variations in how grief can manifest, the symptoms of
 prolonged grief disorder occur across genders and in diverse social and cultural groups.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder often experience maladaptive cognitions
 about the self, guilt about the death, and diminished future life expectancy and life goals.
 Somatic complaints commonly accompany the condition and may be related to comorbid
 depression and anxiety, social identity disruption, and increased health care visits; the somatic
 symptoms may be associated with those that were experienced by the deceased (e.g., changes in
 appetite). Harmful health behaviors related to decreased self-care and concern are also common
 in individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder. Hallucinations about the deceased
 (e.g., hearing the deceased person’s voice) may occur during normal grief but may be more
 common in individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder; hallucinations experienced
 by individuals with prolonged grief disorder symptoms may be associated with disruptions of
 social identity and purpose related to the death (e.g., confusion about one’s role in life, feeling of
 meaninglessness). Other associated features of prolonged grief disorder include bitterness, anger,
 or restlessness; blaming others for the death; and decreased sleep quantity and quality.
Prevalence
 The prevalence of DSM-5 prolonged grief disorder in adults is unknown. Meta-analysis of
 studies across four continents that used a different definition for prolonged grief disorder with at
 least a 6-month duration postloss suggests a pooled prevalence of 9.8%; however, there was
 substantial methodological heterogeneity across studies (e.g., in symptom definitions, measures,
 duration of bereavement), which affected the prevalence findings. Populations with elevated
 exposure to trauma may have higher prevalence rates. Mean prevalence of prolonged grief
 presentations may be higher in high-income Western countries than in high- and upper-middle
income Asian countries, but recent studies in China have revealed higher rates and substantial
 variation. Prevalence of persistent complex bereavement disorder (included in DSM-5 Section
 III, “Conditions for Further Study”) among bereaved U.S. youth in the community was estimated
 at 18%.
 Development and Course
 There are limited data on the course of prolonged grief disorder across the life span. Symptoms
 usually begin within the initial months after the death, although there may be a delay before the
 full syndrome appears. Preliminary evidence suggests that course may be especially prolonged
 among parents after the death of a child. The course of prolonged grief disorder may be
 complicated by comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder, which is more common in situations of
 bereavement following the violent death of a loved one (e.g., murder, suicide) when grief for the
 bereaved may be accompanied by personal life threat and/or witnessing of violent and potentially
 gruesome death. Older age may be associated with a higher risk of developing the disorder after
 the death of a loved one. Older adults with prolonged grief disorder symptoms may be at
 elevated risk for progressive cognitive decline.
 325
 In children, distress may be expressed in play and behavior, developmental regressions, and
 anxious or protest behavior at times of separation and reunion. Young children may experience
 symptoms of prolonged grief disorder in specific ways because of their age. The loss of a
 primary caregiver may be particularly traumatic for a young child, given the disorganizing
 effects of the caregiver’s absence. Young children may protest or become angry when daily care
 activities are performed differently than by the deceased (e.g., cooking, discipline, bedtime
 rituals). They may express intense insecurity about their future, often manifested as worries
 about the health and safety of caregivers and about themselves, with repeated questions about
 death. They may engage in searching for the deceased because they do not understand the
 permanence of death. Young children tend toward somatic manifestations such as disturbances in
 sleep, eating, digestion, and level of energy. They may express yearning in thought and play as a
 wish, literally, to physically reunite with the deceased to overcome the painful physical
 separation (e.g., to climb a ladder to heaven or lie in the ground next to a parent). Young children
 typically do not understand or describe numbing, whereas adolescents may describe “not feeling
 anything.”
 In children and adolescents, ongoing preoccupation with the circumstances of the death
 might involve focusing on distressing aspects of physical deterioration over the course of a fatal
illness and/or the inability of a caregiver to perform vital caregiving functions. Identity
 disruption may include feeling profoundly different from others, often in response to loss
 reminders (e.g., making Mother’s Day cards at school, watching a friend enjoy a hobby with a
 sibling). Children and adolescents may verbally, in their behavior, or through emotional
 withdrawal show reluctance to join adults in activities that serve as loss reminders. They may
 experience intense emotional pain over feeling deprived (“robbed”) of the deceased’s help with
 ongoing developmental tasks (e.g., onset of menses). Separation distress may be predominant in
 younger children, and distress over disruptions in social identity (e.g., confusion about purpose
 in life) and risk for comorbid depression can increasingly manifest in older children and
 adolescents.
 Failure to achieve age-appropriate developmental milestones and transitions is a
 manifestation of failure to reintegrate into life roles. For older children and adolescents, feeling
 that life is meaningless without the person who died may include giving up on developmental
 aspirations (“It’s not worth trying if they can’t be here”), not caring about risky behavior (“So
 what if I get hurt or die?”), or feeling that their future is “ruined.” Older children and adolescents
 may be apprehensive over sharing a similar fate as the deceased, including premature death.
 Loneliness may be intensified by keeping grief private, sometimes over not wanting to add to the
 distress of a grieving caregiver or to avoid presumed stigma from peers.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Risk for prolonged grief disorder symptoms is heightened by increased
 dependency on the deceased prior to the death, by the death of a child, by violent or unexpected
 deaths, and by economic stressors. The disorder has a higher prevalence following the death of a
 spouse/partner or child compared with other kinship relationships to the deceased. Disturbances
 in caregiver availability and support increase the risk for bereaved children.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are observed across cultural settings, but grief
 responses may manifest in culturally specific ways, including in expected duration, and show
 historical variation. For example, across cultures, nightmares about the deceased may be
 especially distressing because of their attributed significance; the prevalence of hallucinations of
 the deceased or of grief-related somatic symptoms may vary; and indirect expressions of
 prolonged grief disorder–related functional impairment (e.g., unhealthy
 326
 behaviors like drinking or poor self-care) may be more prevalent than direct expressions of grief.
 The inability to carry out funerary rituals in some cultures may worsen symptoms of prolonged
 grief disorder, possibly because of interpretation of their impact on the spiritual status of the
 deceased. Some studies suggest higher prevalence of the symptoms of prolonged grief disorder
 in African Americans relative to non-Hispanic Whites; the cause for these elevations requires
 further study in areas such as differential exposure to sudden or violent death. Differences in
 mourning practices may contribute to the cultural prescription or prohibition of specific grief
 expressions, and cultural norms about the social status of the bereaved may affect grief intensity
and duration, such as different levels of support or societal sanction toward remarriage
 depending on the gender of the bereaved. Diagnosis of the disorder requires that the persistent
 and severe responses go beyond cultural norms of grief responses and not be better explained by
 culturally specific mourning rituals.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Some studies find higher disorder prevalence or symptom severity among bereaved women, but
 other studies conclude the gender disparity is small and/or not statistically significant.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are at heightened risk for suicidal
 ideation, even after adjustment for the effect of major depression and PTSD. The association of
 prolonged grief disorder symptoms and suicidal ideation is consistent across the life span and
 cross-nationally. However, the existing literature does not establish whether suicidal ideation
 associated with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder is linked to a higher incidence of suicidal
 behavior. Stigma, isolation, thwarted belongingness, avoidance, and psychological distress in
 bereaved individuals are associated with suicidal ideation. Compared with individuals whose
 bereavement is due to nonviolent causes, individuals whose prolonged grief disorder symptoms
 are the result of a violent loss (e.g., homicide, suicide, accident) are at greater risk for suicidal
 ideation. Similarly, individuals who experience the death of a child, especially if the child is
 younger than 25, are more likely to develop prolonged grief disorder symptoms that are
 associated with suicidal ideation.
 Functional Consequences of Prolonged Grief Disorder
 Symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are associated with impairments in work and social
 functioning and with harmful health behaviors, such as increased tobacco and alcohol use. They
 are also associated with marked increases in risks for serious medical conditions, including
 cardiac disease, hypertension, cancer, immunological deficiency, and reduced quality of life.
 Long-term developmental consequences among children and adolescents include premature
 school withdrawal, diminished educational aspirations, and reduced academic attainment; young
 women in particular may be hesitant to marry as they transition to adulthood. Impaired cognitive
 functioning may be associated with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder, especially in middle
age and older adults.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Normal grief.
 Prolonged grief disorder is distinguished from normal grief by the presence of
 severe grief reactions that persist at least 12 months (6 months in children or adolescents) after
 the death of a person who was close to the bereaved individual. It is only when severe levels of
 grief response persist for the specified duration following the death, interfere with the
 individual’s capacity to function, and exceed cultural, social, or religious norms that prolonged
 grief disorder is diagnosed. In evaluating the requirement for clinically significant symptoms to
 be present most days over the past month, it should be noted that marked increases in grief
 severity can be seen in normal grieving around calendar
327
 days that are reminders of the loss, such as the anniversary of the death, birthdays, wedding
 anniversaries, and holidays; this exacerbation of grief severity does not by itself, in the absence
 of persistent grief at other times, constitute evidence of prolonged grief disorder.
 Depressive disorders.
 Prolonged grief disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent
 depressive disorder share several symptoms, including low mood, crying, and suicidal thinking.
 However, in prolonged grief disorder the distress is focused on feelings of loss and separation
 from a loved one rather than reflecting generalized low mood. Major depressive disorder may
 also be preceded by the death of a loved one, with or without comorbid prolonged grief disorder.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Individuals who experience bereavement as a result of violent or
 accidental death may develop both PTSD and prolonged grief disorder. Both conditions can
 involve intrusive thoughts and avoidance. Whereas intrusions in PTSD revolve around the
 traumatic event (which may have caused the death of a loved one), intrusive memories in
 prolonged grief disorder focus on thoughts about many aspects of the relationship with the
 deceased, including positive aspects of the relationship and distress over the separation. Unlike
 avoidance in PTSD, which is manifested by avoidance of memories, thoughts, or feelings
 associated with the traumatic event that led to the death of the loved one (e.g., memories of the
 fatal automobile accident that killed the loved one), the avoidance in prolonged grief disorder is
 of reminders that the loved one is no longer present (e.g., avoidance of activities carried out
 together with the deceased). Moreover, reexperiencing memories in PTSD tend to be more
 perceptual, with the individual reporting that the memory feels like it is occurring in the “here
 and now,” which tends not to be the case in prolonged grief disorder. In prolonged grief disorder,
 there is also a yearning for the deceased, which is absent in PTSD.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 Separation anxiety disorder is characterized by anxiety about
 separation from current attachment figures, whereas prolonged grief disorder involves distress
 about separation from a deceased person.
 Psychotic disorder.
 Hallucinations about the deceased (e.g., seeing the deceased in a favorite
 chair) or transient sensations about the presence of the deceased (e.g., by touch, voice, or sight)
 are common cross-culturally during normal grief, may be experienced as reassuring, and often
 occur while the individual is falling asleep (hypnagogic). To receive a diagnosis of psychotic
 disorder, individuals with prolonged grief disorder must also endorse other symptoms of
 psychosis, such as delusions, disorganized thinking, or negative symptoms.
 Comorbidity
 The most common comorbid disorders with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are major
 depressive disorder, PTSD, and substance use disorders. PTSD is more frequently comorbid with
 prolonged grief disorder symptoms when the death occurred in violent or accidental
 circumstances. Separation anxiety disorder involving major living attachment figures may be
 comorbid with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder.