 Acute Stress Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one
 (or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
 2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
 314
 3. Learning that the event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend.
 Note: In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the
 event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
 4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the
 traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains, police
 officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).
 Note: This does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television,
 movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
 B. Presence of nine (or more) of the following symptoms from any of the five
 categories of intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, and arousal,
 beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
 Intrusion Symptoms
 1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
 event(s). Note: In children, repetitive play may occur in which themes or
 aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
 2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream
 are related to the event(s). Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams
 without recognizable content.
 3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts
 as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a
 continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of
 awareness of present surroundings.) Note: In children, trauma-specific
 reenactment may occur in play.
 4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress or marked physiological reactions
 in response to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect
 of the traumatic event(s).
 Negative Mood
 5. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to
 experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
 Dissociative Symptoms
 6. An altered sense of the reality of one’s surroundings or oneself (e.g., seeing
 oneself from another’s perspective, being in a daze, time slowing).
 7. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically
 due to dissociative amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury,
 alcohol, or drugs).
 Avoidance Symptoms
8. Efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely
 associated with the traumatic event(s).
 9. Efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities,
 objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings
 about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
 Arousal Symptoms
 10. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep, restless sleep).
 11. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation), typically
 expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.
 12. Hypervigilance.
 13. Problems with concentration.
 14. Exaggerated startle response.
 315
 C. Duration of the disturbance (symptoms in Criterion B) is 3 days to 1 month after
 trauma exposure.
 Note: Symptoms typically begin immediately after the trauma, but persistence
 for at least 3 days and up to a month is needed to meet disorder criteria.
 D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., medication or alcohol) or another medical condition (e.g., mild traumatic
 brain injury) and is not better explained by brief psychotic disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of acute stress disorder is the development of characteristic symptoms
 lasting from 3 days to 1 month following exposure to one or more traumatic events (Criterion A),
 which are the same type as described in PTSD Criterion A (for more information, see
 “Diagnostic Features” for PTSD).
 The clinical presentation of acute stress disorder may vary by individual but typically
 involves an anxiety response that includes some form of reexperiencing of or reactivity to the
 traumatic event. Presentations may include intrusion symptoms, negative mood, dissociative
 symptoms, avoidance symptoms, and arousal symptoms (Criterion B1–B14). In some
 individuals, a dissociative or detached presentation can predominate, although these individuals
 typically will also display strong emotional or physiological reactivity in response to trauma
 reminders. In other individuals, there can be a strong anger response in which reactivity is
 characterized by irritable or possibly aggressive responses.
 Intrusion symptoms (Criterion B1–B4) are the same as described in PTSD Criterion B1–B5
 (for discussion of these symptoms, see “Diagnostic Features” for PTSD; note that acute stress
 disorder Criterion B4 comprises PTSD Criterion B4 and B5). Individuals with acute stress
 disorder may have a persistent inability to feel positive emotions (e.g., happiness, joy,
satisfaction, or emotions associated with intimacy, tenderness, sexuality) but can experience
 negative emotions such as fear, sadness, anger, guilt, or shame (Criterion B5). Alterations in
 awareness can include depersonalization, a detached sense of oneself (e.g., seeing oneself from
 the other side of the room), or derealization, having a distorted view of one’s surroundings (e.g.,
 perceiving that things are moving in slow motion, seeing things in a daze, not being aware of
 events that one would normally encode) (Criterion B6). Some individuals also report an inability
 to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event that was presumably encoded. This
 symptom is attributable to dissociative amnesia and is not attributable to head injury, alcohol, or
 drugs (Criterion B7). Stimuli associated with the trauma are persistently avoided. The individual
 commonly makes deliberate efforts to avoid thoughts, memories, or feelings (e.g., by using
 distraction or suppression techniques, including substance use, to avoid internal reminders)
 (Criterion B8), and to avoid activities, conversations, objects, situations, or people who arouse
 recollections of it (Criterion B9).
 It is very common for individuals with acute stress disorder to experience problems with
 sleep onset and maintenance, which may be associated with nightmares and safety concerns or
 with generalized elevated arousal that interferes with adequate sleep (Criterion B10). Individuals
 with acute stress disorder may exhibit irritable behavior and may even engage in aggressive
 verbal or physical behavior with little or no provocation (e.g., yelling at people, getting into
 fights, destroying objects) (Criterion B11). Acute stress disorder is often characterized by a
 heightened vigilance for potential threats, including those that are related to the traumatic
 experience (e.g., following a motor vehicle accident, being especially sensitive to the threat
 potentially caused by cars or trucks) and those not related to the traumatic event (e.g., being
 fearful of suffering a heart attack) (Criterion B12). Concentration difficulties (Criterion B13)
 include difficulty remembering familiar facts (e.g.,
 316
 forgetting one’s telephone number) or daily events (e.g., having recently read part of a book
 or newspaper) or attending to focused tasks (e.g., following a conversation for a sustained period
 of time).
 Individuals with acute stress disorder may be very reactive to unexpected stimuli, displaying
 a heightened startle response or jumpiness to loud noises (e.g., in response to a telephone
 ringing) or unexpected movements (Criterion B14). Startle responses are involuntary and
 reflexive (automatic, instantaneous), and stimuli that evoke exaggerated startle responses
 (Criterion B14) need not be related to the traumatic event.
 The full symptom picture must last for at least 3 days after the traumatic event but should not
 last longer than 1 month (Criterion C). Symptoms that occur immediately after the event but
 resolve in less than 3 days would not meet criteria for acute stress disorder.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with acute stress disorder commonly engage in catastrophic or extremely negative
 thoughts about their role in the traumatic event, their response to the traumatic experience, or the
 likelihood of future harm. For example, an individual with acute stress disorder may feel
 excessively guilty about not having prevented the traumatic event or about not adapting to the
experience more successfully. Individuals with acute stress disorder may also interpret their
 symptoms in a catastrophic manner, such that flashback memories or emotional numbing may be
 interpreted as a sign of diminished mental capacity. It is common for individuals with acute
 stress disorder to experience panic attacks in the initial month after trauma exposure that may be
 triggered by trauma reminders or may apparently occur spontaneously. Additionally, individuals
 with acute stress disorder may display chaotic or impulsive behavior. For example, individuals
 may drive recklessly, make irrational decisions, or gamble excessively. In children, there may be
 significant separation anxiety, possibly manifested by excessive needs for attention from
 caregivers. In the case of bereavement following a death that occurred in traumatic
 circumstances, the symptoms of acute stress disorder can involve acute grief reactions. In such
 cases, reexperiencing, dissociative, and arousal symptoms may involve reactions to the loss, such
 as intrusive memories of the circumstances of the individual’s death, disbelief that the individual
 has died, and anger about the death. Postconcussive symptoms (e.g., headaches, dizziness,
 sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits), which occur frequently following
 mild traumatic brain injury (TBI), are also frequently seen in individuals with acute stress
 disorder. Postconcussive symptoms are equally common in brain-injured and non-brain-injured
 populations, and the frequent occurrence of postconcussive symptoms could be attributable to
 acute stress disorder symptoms.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of acute stress disorder in recently trauma-exposed populations (i.e., within 1
 month of trauma exposure) varies according to the nature of the event and the context in which it
 is assessed. In research conducted in Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, acute
 stress disorder was identified in less than 20% of cases following traumatic events that do not
 involve interpersonal assault—for example, motor vehicle accidents, mild TBI, severe burns, and
 industrial accidents. Higher rates (i.e., 19%–50%) were usually found following interpersonal
 traumatic events (e.g., assault, rape).
 Development and Course
 By definition, acute stress disorder cannot be diagnosed until 3 days after a traumatic event.
 Although acute stress disorder may progress to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) after 1
 month, it may also be a transient stress response that remits within 1 month of trauma exposure
 and does not result in PTSD. Approximately half of individuals who eventually develop PTSD
 initially present with acute stress disorder. Longitudinal analyses indicate
 317
 that acute stress symptoms can remit, remain constant, or worsen over time, largely as a result of
 ongoing life stressors or further traumatic events.
 The forms of reexperiencing can vary across development. Unlike adults or adolescents,
 young children may report frightening dreams without content that clearly reflects aspects of the
 trauma (e.g., waking in fright in the aftermath of the trauma but being unable to relate the content
 of the dream to the traumatic event). Children age 6 years and younger are more likely than older
 children to express reexperiencing symptoms through play that refers directly or symbolically to
the trauma. For example, a very young child who survived a fire may draw pictures of flames.
 Young children also do not necessarily manifest fearful reactions at the time of the exposure or
 even during reexperiencing. Parents typically report a range of emotional expressions, such as
 anger, shame, or withdrawal, and even excessively bright positive affect, in young children who
 are traumatized. Although children may avoid reminders of the trauma, they sometimes become
 preoccupied with reminders (e.g., a young child bitten by a dog may talk about dogs constantly
 yet avoid going outside because of fear of coming into contact with a dog).
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Risk factors include prior mental disorder, high levels of negative emotional
 responses such as depressed mood and anxiousness (also termed negative affectivity or
 neuroticism), greater perceived severity of the traumatic event, and an avoidant coping style. A
 tendency to make catastrophic appraisals of the traumatic experience, often characterized by
 exaggerated appraisals of future harm, guilt, or hopelessness, is strongly predictive of acute
 stress disorder.
 Environmental.
 Genetic and physiological.
 First and foremost, an individual must be exposed to a traumatic event to be at
 risk for acute stress disorder. Risk factors for the disorder include a history of prior trauma.
 Elevated reactivity, as reflected by acoustic startle response, prior to
 trauma exposure increases the risk for developing acute stress disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The profile of symptoms of acute stress disorder may vary cross-culturally, particularly with
 respect to dissociative symptoms, nightmares, avoidance, and somatic symptoms (e.g., dizziness,
 shortness of breath, heat sensations, pain complaints). Acute stress reactions may be shaped by
 cultural values and norms regarding the expression of extreme emotions, even in extraordinary
 situations. Cultural concepts of distress shape the local symptom profiles of acute stress disorder.
 Some cultural groups may display variants of dissociative responses, such as possession or
 trancelike behaviors in the initial month after trauma exposure. Panic symptoms may be salient
 in acute stress disorder among Cambodians because of the association of traumatic exposure
 with panic-like khyâl attacks, and ataque de nervios among Latin Americans may also follow a
 traumatic exposure. For more information regarding cultural concepts of distress, refer to the
 Section III chapter “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis.”
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Acute stress disorder is more prevalent among women than among men in studies across
 multiple countries. The increased risk for the disorder in women may be attributable to a greater
 likelihood of exposure to the types of traumatic events with a high conditional risk for acute
 stress disorder, such as rape, other interpersonal violence, and childhood trauma, including
 sexual abuse. Other factors likely contributing to the higher prevalence in women include gender
 differences in the emotional and cognitive processing of trauma. Sex-linked
 318
neurobiological differences in stress response as well as sociocultural factors may also contribute
 to women’s increased risk for acute stress disorder.
 Functional Consequences of Acute Stress Disorder
 Impaired functioning in social, interpersonal, or occupational domains has been shown across
 survivors of accidents, assault, and rape who develop acute stress disorder. The extreme levels of
 anxiety that may be associated with acute stress disorder may interfere with sleep, energy levels,
 and capacity to attend to tasks. Avoidance in acute stress disorder can result in generalized
 withdrawal from many situations that are perceived as potentially threatening, which can lead to
 nonattendance of medical appointments, avoidance of driving to important appointments, and
 absenteeism from work.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Adjustment disorders.
 In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any severity rather than of
 the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress disorder. The diagnosis of an
 adjustment disorder is used when the response to a Criterion A event does not meet the criteria
 for acute stress disorder (or another specific mental disorder) and when the symptom pattern of
 acute stress disorder occurs in response to a stressor that does not meet Criterion A for exposure
 to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence (e.g., spouse leaving, being fired).
 For example, severe stress reactions to life-threatening illnesses that may include some acute
 stress disorder symptoms may be more appropriately described as an adjustment disorder. Some
 forms of acute stress response do not include acute stress disorder symptoms and may be
 characterized by anger, depression, or guilt. These responses are more appropriately described as
 primarily an adjustment disorder. Depressive or anger responses in an adjustment disorder may
 involve rumination about the traumatic event, as opposed to involuntary and intrusive distressing
 memories in acute stress disorder.
 Panic disorder.
 Spontaneous panic attacks are very common in acute stress disorder. However,
 panic disorder is diagnosed only if panic attacks are unexpected and there is anxiety about future
 attacks or maladaptive changes in behavior associated with fear of dire consequences of the
 attacks.
 Dissociative disorders.
 Severe dissociative responses (in the absence of characteristic acute stress
 disorder symptoms) may be diagnosed as derealization/depersonalization disorder. If severe
 amnesia of the trauma persists in the absence of characteristic acute stress disorder symptoms,
 the diagnosis of dissociative amnesia may be indicated.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD because the
 symptom pattern in acute stress disorder must resolve within 1 month of the traumatic event. If
 the symptoms persist for more than 1 month and meet criteria for PTSD, the diagnosis is
 changed from acute stress disorder to PTSD.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 In obsessive-compulsive disorder, there are recurrent intrusive
 thoughts, but these meet the definition of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive thoughts are not
 related to an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually present, and other symptoms
 of acute stress disorder are typically absent.
 Psychotic disorders.
 Flashbacks in acute stress disorder must be distinguished from illusions,
Traumatic brain injury.
 hallucinations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophrenia, other
 psychotic disorders, depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, a delirium,
 substance/medication-induced disorders, and psychotic disorders due to another medical
 condition. Acute stress disorder flashbacks are distinguished from these other perceptual
 disturbances by being directly related to the traumatic experience and by occurring in the
 absence of other psychotic or substance-induced features.
 319
 When a brain injury occurs in the context of a traumatic event (e.g.,
 traumatic accident, bomb blast, acceleration/deceleration trauma), symptoms of acute stress
 disorder may appear. An event causing head trauma may also constitute a psychological
 traumatic event, and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms are not mutually exclusive and may
 occur concurrently. Symptoms previously termed postconcussive (e.g., headaches, dizziness,
 sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits) can occur in brain-injured and
 non-brain-injured populations, including individuals with acute stress disorder. Because
 symptoms of acute stress disorder and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a
 differential diagnosis between acute stress disorder and neurocognitive disorder symptoms
 attributable to TBI may be possible based on the presence of symptoms that are distinctive to
 each presentation. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are characteristic of acute stress
 disorder and not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation and confusion are more specific to
 TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to acute stress disorder. Furthermore, differential is aided by
 the fact that symptoms of acute stress disorder persist for up to only 1 month following trauma
 exposure.