Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A pattern of behavior in which a child actively approaches and interacts with
 unfamiliar adults and exhibits at least two of the following:
 1. Reduced or absent reticence in approaching and interacting with unfamiliar
 adults.
 2. Overly familiar verbal or physical behavior (that is not consistent with
 culturally sanctioned and with age-appropriate social boundaries).
 299
 3. Diminished or absent checking back with adult caregiver after venturing
 away, even in unfamiliar settings.
 4. Willingness to go off with an unfamiliar adult with minimal or no hesitation.
 B. The behaviors in Criterion A are not limited to impulsivity (as in attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder) but include socially disinhibited behavior.
 C. The child has experienced a pattern of extremes of insufficient care as
evidenced by at least one of the following:
 1. Social neglect or deprivation in the form of persistent lack of having basic
 emotional needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection met by caregiving
 adults.
 2. Repeated changes of primary caregivers that limit opportunities to form stable
 attachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care).
 3. Rearing in unusual settings that severely limit opportunities to form selective
 attachments (e.g., institutions with high child-to-caregiver ratios).
 D. The care in Criterion C is presumed to be responsible for the disturbed behavior
 in Criterion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A began following the
 pathogenic care in Criterion C).
 E. The child has a developmental age of at least 9 months.
 Specify if:
 Persistent: The disorder has been present for more than 12 months.
 Specify current severity:
 Disinhibited social engagement disorder is specified as severe when the child
 exhibits all symptoms of the disorder, with each symptom manifesting at
 relatively high levels.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of disinhibited social engagement disorder is a pattern of behavior that
 involves culturally inappropriate, overly familiar behavior with relative strangers (Criterion A).
 This overly familiar behavior violates the social boundaries of the culture. A diagnosis of
 disinhibited social engagement disorder should not be made before children are developmentally
 able to form selective attachments. For this reason, the child must have a developmental age of at
 least 9 months.
 Associated Features
 Because of the shared etiological association with social neglect, disinhibited social engagement
 disorder may co-occur with developmental delays, especially cognitive and language delays,
 stereotypies, and other signs of severe neglect, such as malnutrition or poor care. However, signs
 of the disorder often persist even after these other signs of neglect are no longer present.
 Therefore, it is not uncommon for children with the disorder to present with no current signs of
 neglect. Moreover, the condition can present in children who show no signs of disordered
 attachment. Thus, disinhibited social engagement disorder may be seen in children with a history
 of neglect who lack attachments or whose attachments to their caregivers range from disturbed to
 secure.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of disinhibited social engagement disorder is unknown. Nevertheless, the
 disorder appears to be rare, occurring in a minority of children, even those who have experienced
severe early deprivation. In low-income community populations in the United Kingdom, the
 prevalence is up to 2%.
 300
 Development and Course
 Conditions of social neglect are often present in the first months of life in children diagnosed
 with disinhibited social engagement disorder, even before the disorder is diagnosed. As noted by
 research among children with a history of institutional care, if neglect occurs early and signs of
 the disorder appear, clinical features of the disorder are moderately stable over time, particularly
 if conditions of neglect persist.
 Signs of disinhibited social engagement disorder have been described from the second year
 of life through adolescence among children raised in institutional settings, and even into young
 adulthood. There are some differences in manifestations of the disorder from early childhood to
 older ages. At the youngest ages, across many cultures, children typically show reticence when
 interacting with strangers, which is nonpathological, even if they are raised in institutions and
 foster care. Young children with the disorder, however, fail to show reticence to approach and
 are found to engage with, and even accompany, unfamiliar adults without hesitation, as shown
 by research among children with a history of institutionalized care. In preschool children raised
 in institutional settings in the United Kingdom or the United States, verbal and social
 intrusiveness appeared most prominent, often accompanied by attention-seeking behavior;
 preschool children raised in institutional settings across several countries have displayed a
 pattern of engaging in physical contact with strangers. Verbal and physical overfamiliarity
 continued through middle childhood, sometimes accompanied by inauthentic expressions of
 emotion. In adolescence, indiscriminate behavior may extend to peers. Relative to healthy
 adolescents, adolescents with the disorder have more “superficial” peer relationships and more
 peer conflicts. Adult manifestations of the disorder appear to be similar but may include
 excessive self-disclosure and reduced stranger awareness.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 There is some evidence from research with international adoptees in the United
 States that both blunted reward sensitivity and decreased inhibitory control are associated with
 indiscriminate social behavior.
 Environmental.
 Serious social neglect is a diagnostic requirement for disinhibited social
 engagement disorder. The rationale for this requirement includes research finding a strong
 association between neglect and features of the disorder. Other factors also have been implicated,
 such as multiple placement disruptions, borderline personality disorder in the mother, and
 aberrant caregiving behaviors and low quality of care. All of these contribute to the insufficient
 care criterion. Still, the majority of severely neglected children do not develop the disorder. The
 disorder has not been identified in children who experience social neglect only after age 2 years.
 Prognosis is only modestly associated with quality of the caregiving environment following
 serious neglect. In many cases, the disorder persists, even in children whose caregiving
 environment becomes markedly improved.
Genetic and physiological.
 Course modifiers.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 F43.10
 Various neurobiological factors have been associated with symptoms of
 the disorder, but findings concerning the nature of such factors and their specific tie to the
 disorder remain preliminary.
 Caregiving quality seems to moderate the course of disinhibited social
 engagement disorder, at least in young children. Nevertheless, even after placement in normative
 caregiving environments, some children show persistent signs of the disorder, through
 adolescence and into adulthood.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There is limited cross-cultural information on disinhibited social engagement disorder. Cultural
 expectations of children’s social behaviors may affect their level of disinhibition
 301
 toward strangers. The absence of reticence that is characteristic of disinhibited social engagement
 disorder should exceed culturally accepted norms.
 Functional Consequences of Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder
 Disinhibited social engagement disorder significantly impairs young children’s abilities to relate
 interpersonally to adults and peers. Both general social functioning and social competence may
 be impaired, along with increased risk for peer conflicts and victimization.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Children with disinhibited social engagement disorder can
 be distinguished from those with ADHD accompanied by social impulsivity, as the former do not
 show difficulties with attention or hyperactivity.
 Comorbidity
 Conditions associated with neglect, including cognitive delays, language delays, and
 stereotypies, may co-occur with disinhibited social engagement disorder. Autism spectrum
 disorder may also co-occur. In younger children and in middle childhood, disinhibited social
 engagement disorder often co-occurs with ADHD and externalizing disorders; this co-occurrence
 has been proposed to relate to common impairments in cognitive inhibitory control.