Adjustment Disorders
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The development of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an
 identifiable stressor(s) occurring within 3 months of the onset of the stressor(s).
 B. These symptoms or behaviors are clinically significant, as evidenced by one or
 both of the following:
 1. Marked distress that is out of proportion to the severity or intensity of the
 stressor, taking into account the external context and the cultural factors that
 might influence symptom severity and presentation.
 2. Significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
 functioning.
 C. The stress-related disturbance does not meet the criteria for another mental
 disorder and is not merely an exacerbation of a preexisting mental disorder.
 D. The symptoms do not represent normal bereavement and are not better
 explained by prolonged grief disorder.
E. Once the stressor or its consequences have terminated, the symptoms do not
 persist for more than an additional 6 months.
 Specify whether:
 F43.21 With depressed mood: Low mood, tearfulness, or feelings of
 hopelessness are predominant.
 F43.22 With anxiety: Nervousness, worry, jitteriness, or separation anxiety is
 predominant.
 F43.23 With mixed anxiety and depressed mood: A combination of
 depression and anxiety is predominant.
 F43.24 With disturbance of conduct: Disturbance of conduct is predominant.
 F43.25 With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct: Both emotional
 symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety) and a disturbance of conduct are
 predominant.
 F43.20 Unspecified: For maladaptive reactions that are not classifiable as one
 of the specific subtypes of adjustment disorder.
 320
 Specify if:
 Acute: This specifier can be used to indicate persistence of symptoms for less
 than 6 months.
 Persistent (chronic): This specifier can be used to indicate persistence of
 symptoms for 6 months or longer. By definition, symptoms cannot persist for
 more than 6 months after the termination of the stressor or its consequences.
 The persistent specifier therefore applies when the duration of the disturbance is
 longer than 6 months in response to a chronic stressor or to a stressor that has
 enduring consequences.
 Specifiers
 By definition, an adjustment disorder must resolve within 6 months of the termination of the
 stressor or its consequences. However, the symptoms may persist for a prolonged period (i.e.,
 longer than 6 months) if they occur in response to a persistent stressor (e.g., a chronic disabling
 other medical condition) or to a stressor that has enduring consequences (e.g., the financial and
 emotional difficulties resulting from a divorce). The duration of the symptoms of an adjustment
 disorder can be indicated by using the acute or persistent (chronic) specifiers. The acute specifier
 is used to indicate persistence of symptoms for less than 6 months. The persistent (chronic)
 specifier is used to indicate persistence of symptoms for 6 months or longer. This latter specifier
 therefore applies when the duration of the disturbance is longer than 6 months in response to a
 persistent stressor or to a stressor that has enduring consequences.
 Diagnostic Features
The presence of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable stressor is the
 essential feature of adjustment disorders (Criterion A). The stressor may be a single event (e.g., a
 termination of a romantic relationship), or there may be multiple stressors (e.g., marked business
 difficulties and marital problems). Stressors may be recurrent (e.g., associated with seasonal
 business crises, unfulfilling sexual relationships) or continuous (e.g., a persistent painful illness
 with increasing disability, living in a crime-ridden neighborhood). Stressors may affect a single
 individual, an entire family, or a larger group or community (e.g., a natural disaster). Some
 stressors may accompany specific developmental events (e.g., going to school, leaving a parental
 home, reentering a parental home, getting married, becoming a parent, failing to attain
 occupational goals, retirement).
 Adjustment disorders may be diagnosed following the death of a loved one when the
 intensity, quality, or persistence of grief reactions exceeds what normally might be expected,
 when cultural, religious, or age-appropriate norms are taken into account and the grief reaction
 does not meet criteria for prolonged grief disorder.
 Prevalence
 Adjustment disorders are common, although prevalence may vary widely as a function of the
 population studied and the assessment methods used. The percentage of individuals in outpatient
 mental health treatment in the United States with a principal diagnosis of an adjustment disorder
 ranges from approximately 5% to 20%. Rates of adjustment disorder may be higher in women,
 as noted by research in Denmark. In Australian, Canadian, Israeli, and U.S. hospital psychiatric
 consultation settings, an adjustment disorder was often the most common diagnosis in the 1990s,
 frequently reaching 50%.
 Development and Course
 By definition, the disturbance in adjustment disorders begins within 3 months of onset of a
 stressor. If the stressor is an acute event (e.g., being fired from a job), the onset of the
 disturbance is usually immediate (i.e., within a few days) and the duration is relatively brief
 321
 (i.e., no more than a few months). If the stressor or its consequences persist, the adjustment
 disorder may also continue to be present and become the persistent form. By definition, if
 symptoms persist beyond 6 months after the stressor or its consequences have ceased, the
 diagnosis of adjustment disorder would no longer apply.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Persons from disadvantaged life circumstances experience a high rate of stressors
 and may be at increased risk for adjustment disorders.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Because the nature, meaning, and experience of the stressors and the evaluation of the response
 to stressors may vary across cultures, cultural context is key in determining whether the
adjustment response is maladaptive. Migrants and refugees may experience stressful major
 contextual and cultural changes that can make this assessment challenging. Suffering is assumed
 to be an intrinsic aspect of normal life in some cultural contexts, such that distressful reactions to
 stressful life events may not be viewed as maladaptive or worthy of treatment. Self-immolation is
 also a risk associated with adjustment disorder in some cultural contexts.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Adjustment disorders are associated with an increased risk of suicide attempts and suicide.
 Among migrant populations, including Turkish migrants in Western Europe and South Asian or
 South East Asian migrants in Gulf countries, adjustment disorder was found to be among the
 most common diagnoses associated with suicide-related behavior.
 Functional Consequences of Adjustment Disorders
 The subjective distress or impairment in functioning associated with adjustment disorders is
 frequently manifested as decreased performance at work or school and temporary changes in
 social relationships. An adjustment disorder may complicate the course of illness in individuals
 who have another medical condition (e.g., decreased compliance with the recommended medical
 regimen; increased length of hospital stay).
 Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 If an individual has symptoms that meet criteria for a major depressive
 Posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder.
 disorder in response to a stressor, the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is not applicable. The
 symptom profile of major depressive disorder differentiates it from adjustment disorders.
 In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be
 of any severity rather than of the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress
 disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In distinguishing adjustment disorders from
 these two posttraumatic diagnoses, there are both timing and symptom profile considerations.
 Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed immediately and persist up to 6 months after exposure to
 the traumatic event, whereas acute stress disorder can only occur between 3 days and 1 month of
 exposure to the stressor, and PTSD cannot be diagnosed until at least 1 month has passed since
 the occurrence of the traumatic stressor. The required symptom profiles for PTSD and acute
 stress disorder differentiate them from the adjustment disorders. With regard to symptom
 profiles, an adjustment disorder may be diagnosed following a traumatic event when an
 individual exhibits symptoms of either acute stress disorder or PTSD that do not meet or exceed
 the diagnostic threshold for either disorder. Because adjustment disorder cannot persist for more
 than 6 months after termination of the stressor or its consequences, cases in which symptoms
 occurring in response
 322
 to a traumatic event that fall short of the diagnostic threshold for PTSD and that persist for
 longer than 6 months should be diagnosed as other specified trauma- and stressor-related
 disorder. An adjustment disorder should also be diagnosed for individuals who have not been
 exposed to a traumatic event meeting Criterion A for PTSD, but who otherwise exhibit the full
Personality disorders.
 Bereavement.
 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
 Normative stress reactions.
 F43.8
 symptom profile of either acute stress disorder or PTSD.
 With regard to personality disorders, some personality features may be
 associated with a vulnerability to situational distress that may resemble an adjustment disorder.
 The lifetime history of personality functioning will help inform the interpretation of distressed
 behaviors to aid in distinguishing a long-standing personality disorder from an adjustment
 disorder. In addition to some personality disorders incurring vulnerability to distress, stressors
 may also exacerbate personality disorder symptoms. In the presence of a personality disorder, if
 the symptom criteria for an adjustment disorder are met, and the stress-related disturbance
 exceeds what may be attributable to maladaptive personality disorder symptoms (i.e., Criterion C
 is met), then the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder should be made.
 Clinically significant acute bereavement-related distress may sometimes be
 diagnosed as an adjustment disorder if the bereavement is judged to be out of proportion to what
 would be expected or significantly impairs self-care and interpersonal relations. When such
 symptoms persist for more than 12 months after the death, the diagnosis is either prolonged grief
 disorder if full criteria are met or else other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder.
 In psychological factors affecting other
 medical conditions, specific psychological entities (e.g., psychological symptoms, behaviors,
 other factors) exacerbate a medical condition. These psychological factors can precipitate,
 exacerbate, or put an individual at risk for medical illness, or they can worsen an existing
 condition. In contrast, an adjustment disorder is a reaction to the stressor (e.g., having a medical
 illness).
 When bad things happen, most people get upset. This is not an
 adjustment disorder. The diagnosis should only be made when the magnitude of the distress (e.g.,
 alterations in mood, anxiety, or conduct) exceeds what would normally be expected (which may
 vary in different cultures) or when the adverse event precipitates functional impairment.
 Comorbidity
 Adjustment disorders can accompany most mental disorders and any medical condition.
 Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed in addition to another mental disorder only if the latter
 does not explain the particular symptoms that occur in reaction to the stressor. For example, an
 individual may develop an adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, after losing a job and at
 the same time have a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Or, an individual may have a
 depressive or bipolar disorder and an adjustment disorder as long as the criteria for both are met.
 Adjustment disorders are common accompaniments of medical illness and may be the major
 psychological response to a medical condition.