Reactive Attachment Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A consistent pattern of inhibited, emotionally withdrawn behavior toward adult
 caregivers, manifested by both of the following:
 1. The child rarely or minimally seeks comfort when distressed.
 2. The child rarely or minimally responds to comfort when distressed.
B. A persistent social and emotional disturbance characterized by at least two of
 the following:
 1. Minimal social and emotional responsiveness to others.
 2. Limited positive affect.
 296
 3. Episodes of unexplained irritability, sadness, or fearfulness that are evident
 even during nonthreatening interactions with adult caregivers.
 C. The child has experienced a pattern of extremes of insufficient care as
 evidenced by at least one of the following:
 1. Social neglect or deprivation in the form of persistent lack of having basic
 emotional needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection met by caregiving
 adults.
 2. Repeated changes of primary caregivers that limit opportunities to form stable
 attachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care).
 3. Rearing in unusual settings that severely limit opportunities to form selective
 attachments (e.g., institutions with high child-to-caregiver ratios).
 D. The care in Criterion C is presumed to be responsible for the disturbed behavior
 in Criterion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A began following the lack of
 adequate care in Criterion C).
 E. The criteria are not met for autism spectrum disorder.
 F. The disturbance is evident before age 5 years.
 G. The child has a developmental age of at least 9 months.
 Specify if:
 Persistent: The disorder has been present for more than 12 months.
 Specify current severity:
 Reactive attachment disorder is specified as severe when a child exhibits all
 symptoms of the disorder, with each symptom manifesting at relatively high
 levels.
 Diagnostic Features
 Reactive attachment disorder is characterized by a pattern of markedly disturbed and
 developmentally inappropriate attachment behaviors, in which a child rarely or minimally turns
 preferentially to an attachment figure for comfort, support, protection, and nurturance. The
 essential feature is absent or grossly underdeveloped attachment between the child and putative
 caregiving adults. Children with reactive attachment disorder are believed to have the capacity to
 form selective attachments. However, because of limited opportunities during early development,
 they fail to show the behavioral manifestations of selective attachments. That is, when distressed,
 they show no consistent effort to obtain comfort, support, nurturance, or protection from
 caregivers. Furthermore, when distressed, children with this disorder do not respond more than
minimally to comforting efforts of caregivers. Thus, the disorder is associated with the absence
 of expected comfort seeking and response to comforting behaviors. As such, children with
 reactive attachment disorder show diminished or absent expression of positive emotions during
 routine interactions with caregivers. In addition, their emotion regulation capacity is
 compromised, and they display episodes of negative emotions of fear, sadness, or irritability that
 are not readily explained. A diagnosis of reactive attachment disorder should not be made in
 children who are developmentally unable to form selective attachments. For this reason, the child
 must have a developmental age of at least 9 months. Diagnostic assessment is enhanced by
 multiple sources of input, supporting that the symptoms are apparent across contexts.
 Associated Features
 Because of the shared etiological association with social neglect, reactive attachment disorder
 often co-occurs with developmental delays, especially in delays in cognition and language. Other
 associated features include stereotypies and other signs of severe neglect (e.g., malnutrition or
 signs of poor care).
 297
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of reactive attachment disorder is unknown, but the disorder is seen relatively
 rarely in clinical settings. The disorder has been found in young children exposed to severe
 neglect before being placed in foster care or raised in institutions. The disorder is uncommon,
 usually occurring in less than 10% of neglected children, even in cases of severe neglect.
 Development and Course
 Conditions of social neglect are often present in the first months of life in children diagnosed
 with reactive attachment disorder, even before the disorder is diagnosed. The clinical features of
 the disorder manifest in a similar fashion between the ages of 9 months and 5 years. That is,
 signs of absent-to-minimal attachment behaviors and associated emotionally aberrant behaviors
 are evident in children throughout this age range, although differing cognitive and motor abilities
 may affect how these behaviors are expressed. Remediation and symptomatic recovery may
 occur through normative caregiving environments; however, in the absence of enhanced
 caregiving, the signs of the disorder may persist, at least for several years. Persistent signs of
 reactive attachment disorder in early adolescence may be associated with problems in social
 functioning. Less is known about the clinical presentation of reactive attachment disorder in
 older children, and the diagnosis should be made with caution in children older than 5 years.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Serious social neglect is a diagnostic requirement for reactive attachment disorder
 and is also the only known risk factor for the disorder. However, the majority of severely
 neglected children do not develop the disorder. Prognosis for children with the disorder appears
 to depend on the quality of the caregiving environment following serious neglect.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There is limited information on reactive attachment behavior in young children from diverse
 cultural backgrounds around the world. Cultural expectations of attachment behaviors and
 caregiving practices may influence development of and concern about these patterns of behaviors
 and their presentations in different settings. Caution should be exercised in making the diagnosis
 of reactive attachment disorder in cultural contexts in which attachment has not been studied.
 Symptoms of reactive attachment disorder may be more common in situations where attachment
 figures have experienced extensive trauma, such as war-zone settings; attachment styles may also
 vary among migrant and refugee children during the resettlement period. Variations in nurturing
 care practices may influence risk of reactive attachment disorder.
 Functional Consequences of Reactive Attachment Disorder
 Reactive attachment disorder significantly impairs young children’s abilities to relate
 interpersonally to adults or peers and is associated with functional impairment across many
 domains of early childhood.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Aberrant social behaviors manifest in young children with reactive
 attachment disorder, but they also are key features of autism spectrum disorder. Specifically,
 young children with either condition can manifest dampened expression of positive emotions,
 cognitive and language delays, and impairments in social reciprocity. As a result, reactive
 attachment disorder must be differentiated from autism spectrum disorder. These
 298
 two disorders can be distinguished based on differential histories of neglect and on the presence
 of restricted interests or ritualized behaviors, specific deficit in social communication, and
 selective attachment behaviors. Children with reactive attachment disorder have experienced a
 history of severe social neglect, although it is not always possible to obtain detailed histories
 about the precise nature of their experiences, especially in initial evaluations. Children with
 autism spectrum disorder will only rarely have a history of social neglect. The restricted interests
 and repetitive behaviors characteristic of autism spectrum disorder are not a feature of reactive
 attachment disorder. These clinical features manifest as excessive adherence to rituals and
 routines; restricted, fixated interests; and unusual sensory reactions. However, it is important to
 note that children with either condition can exhibit stereotypic behaviors such as rocking or
 flapping. Children with either disorder also may exhibit a range of intellectual functioning, but
 only children with autism spectrum disorder exhibit selective impairments in social
 communicative behaviors, such as intentional communication (i.e., impairment in
 communication that is deliberate, goal-directed, and aimed at influencing the behavior of the
 recipient). Children with reactive attachment disorder show social communicative functioning
 comparable to their overall level of intellectual functioning. Finally, children with autism
 spectrum disorder regularly show attachment behavior typical for their developmental level. In
 contrast, children with reactive attachment disorder do so only rarely or inconsistently, if at all.
 Structured observations can help discriminate between the two disorders.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 Depressive disorders.
 F94.2
 Developmental delays often accompany
 reactive attachment disorder, but they should not be confused with the disorder. Children with
 intellectual developmental disorder should exhibit social and emotional skills comparable to their
 cognitive skills and do not demonstrate the profound reduction in positive affect and emotion
 regulation difficulties evident in children with reactive attachment disorder. In addition,
 developmentally delayed children who have reached a cognitive age of 7–9 months should
 demonstrate selective attachments regardless of their chronological age. In contrast, children
 with reactive attachment disorder show lack of preferred attachment despite having attained a
 developmental age of at least 9 months.
 Depression in young children is also associated with reductions in positive
 affect. There is limited evidence, however, to suggest that children with depressive disorders
 have impairments in attachment. That is, young children who have been diagnosed with
 depressive disorders still should seek and respond to comforting efforts by caregivers.
 Comorbidity
 Conditions associated with neglect, including cognitive delays, language delays, and
 stereotypies, often co-occur with reactive attachment disorder. Medical conditions, such as
 severe malnutrition, may accompany signs of the disorder. Internalizing symptoms also may co
occur with reactive attachment disorder. A relationship between reactive attachment disorder and
 externalizing behavior problems or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been
 suggested but not clearly established.