Differential Diagnosis
 Specific phobia, situational type.
 Differentiating agoraphobia from situational specific phobia can
 be challenging in some cases, because these conditions share several symptom characteristics
 and criteria. Specific phobia, situational type, should be diagnosed versus agoraphobia if the fear,
 anxiety, or avoidance is limited to one of the agoraphobic situations. Requiring fears from two or
 more of the agoraphobic situations is a robust means for differentiating agoraphobia from
 specific phobias, particularly the situational subtype. Additional differentiating features include
 the content of the individual’s cognitions. Thus, if the situation is feared for reasons other than
 panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fears of being
 directly harmed by the situation itself, such as fear of the plane crashing for individuals who fear
Separation anxiety disorder.
 flying), then a diagnosis of specific phobia may be more appropriate.
 Separation anxiety disorder can be best differentiated from
 agoraphobia by examining the individual’s cognitions. In separation anxiety disorder, the
 thoughts are about detachment from significant others and the home environment (i.e., parents or
 other attachment figures), whereas in agoraphobia the focus is on panic-like symptoms or other
 incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms in the feared situations.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 Panic disorder.
 Agoraphobia should be differentiated from social anxiety disorder based
 primarily on the situational clusters that trigger fear, anxiety, or avoidance and the individual’s
 cognitions. In social anxiety disorder, the focus is on fear of being negatively evaluated.
 When criteria for panic disorder are met, agoraphobia should not be diagnosed if
 the avoidance behaviors associated with the panic attacks do not extend to avoidance of two or
 more agoraphobic situations.
 250
 Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic
 stress disorder (PTSD) can be differentiated from agoraphobia by examining whether the fear,
 anxiety, or avoidance is related only to situations that remind the individual of a traumatic event.
 If the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is restricted to trauma reminders, and if the avoidance behavior
 does not extend to two or more agoraphobic situations, then a diagnosis of agoraphobia is not
 warranted.
 Major depressive disorder.
 In major depressive disorder, the individual may avoid leaving home
 because of apathy, loss of energy, low self-esteem, and anhedonia. If the avoidance is unrelated
 to fears of panic-like or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms, then agoraphobia should
 not be diagnosed.
 Avoidance related to other medical conditions.
 Individuals with certain medical conditions may
 avoid situations because of realistic concerns about being incapacitated (e.g., fainting in an
 individual with transient ischemic attacks) or being embarrassed (e.g., diarrhea in an individual
 with Crohn’s disease). The diagnosis of agoraphobia should be given only when the fear or
 avoidance is clearly in excess of that usually associated with these medical conditions.


 