Differential Diagnosis
 Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 A separate diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to
 another medical condition is not given if the anxiety disturbance occurs exclusively during the
 course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
 may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the anxiety is
 judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive
 disorder and if anxiety is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
 Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety).
 If the presentation includes a mix of
 different types of symptoms, the specific mental disorder due to another medical condition
 depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical picture.
 Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance
 use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure
 to a toxin, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder should be considered. Certain
 medications are known to increase anxiety (e.g., corticosteroids, estrogens, metoclopramide), and
 when this is the case, the medication may be the most likely etiology, although it may be difficult
 to distinguish whether the anxiety is attributable to the medications or to the medical illness
 itself. When a diagnosis of substance-induced anxiety is being made in relation to recreational or
 nonprescribed drugs, it may be useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate
 laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that develop during or soon after substance intoxication or
 withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/medication
induced anxiety disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance used. If
 the disturbance is associated with both another medical condition and substance use, both
Anxiety disorder (not due to a known medical condition).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Adjustment disorders.
 diagnoses (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication
induced anxiety disorder) can be given. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence
 of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder
 or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition
 or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical
 condition should be distinguished from other anxiety disorders (especially panic disorder and
 generalized anxiety disorder). In other anxiety disorders, no specific and direct causative
 physiological mechanisms associated with another medical condition can be demonstrated. Late
 age at onset, atypical symptoms, and the absence of a personal or family history of anxiety
 disorders suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagnosis of anxiety disorder
 due to another medical condition. Anxiety disorders can exacerbate or pose increased risk for
 medical conditions such as cardiovascular events and myocardial infarction and should not be
 diagnosed as anxiety disorder due to another medical condition in these cases.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be
 distinguished from illness anxiety disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by worry
 about illness, concern about pain, and bodily preoccupations. In the case of illness anxiety
 disorder, individuals may or may not have diagnosed medical conditions. Although
 261
 an individual with illness anxiety disorder and a diagnosed medical condition is likely to
 experience anxiety about the medical condition, the medical condition is not physiologically
 related to the anxiety symptoms.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished
 from adjustment disorders with anxiety or adjustment disorders with anxiety and depressed
 mood. Adjustment disorder is warranted when individuals experience a maladaptive response to
 the stress of being diagnosed with or having to manage the medical condition. The reaction to
 stress usually concerns the meaning or consequences of the medical condition, in contrast with
 the experience of anxiety or mood symptoms that occur as a physiological consequence of the
 medical condition. In adjustment disorder, the anxiety symptoms are typically related to coping
 with the stress of having the medical condition, whereas in anxiety disorder due to another
 medical condition, individuals are more likely to have prominent physical symptoms and to be
 focused on issues other than the stress of the illness itself.

