Differential Diagnosis
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another
 medical condition should be assigned if the individual’s anxiety and worry are judged, based on
 history, laboratory findings, or physical examination, to be a physiological effect of another
 specific medical condition (e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism).
 254
 Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is
 distinguished from generalized anxiety disorder by the fact that a substance or medication (e.g., a
 drug of abuse, exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the anxiety. For
 example, severe anxiety that occurs only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be
 diagnosed as caffeine-induced anxiety disorder.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with social anxiety disorder often have anticipatory anxiety
 that is focused on upcoming social situations in which they must perform or be evaluated by
 others, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry, whether or not they are
 being evaluated.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder worry excessively only
 about separation from attachment figures, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder
 may worry about separation but present other excessive worry concerns as well.
 Panic disorder.
 Panic attacks that are triggered by worry in generalized anxiety disorder would
 not qualify for panic disorder. However, if the individual experiences unexpected panic attacks
 as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of the attacks, then
 an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.
 Illness anxiety disorder and somatic symptom disorder.
 Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder
 worry about multiple events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health.
 If the individual’s only fear is his or her own illness, then illness anxiety disorder should be
 diagnosed. Worry focusing on somatic symptoms is characteristic for somatic symptom disorder.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Several features distinguish the excessive worry of generalized
 anxiety disorder from the obsessional thoughts of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In generalized
 anxiety disorder the focus of the worry is about forthcoming problems, and it is the
 excessiveness of the worry about future events that is abnormal. In obsessive-compulsive
 disorder, the obsessions are inappropriate ideas that take the form of intrusive and unwanted
 thoughts, urges, or images.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder and adjustment disorders.
 Anxiety 
is 
invariably 
present 
in
 posttraumatic stress disorder. Generalized anxiety disorder is not diagnosed if the anxiety and
 worry are better explained by symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder. Although anxiety may
 manifest in adjustment disorder, this residual category should be used only when the criteria are
 not met for any other mental disorder (including generalized anxiety disorder). Moreover, in
Depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders.
 adjustment disorders, the anxiety occurs in response to an identifiable stressor within 3 months
 of the onset of the stressor and does not persist for more than 6 months after the termination of
 the stressor or its consequences.
 Although generalized anxiety/worry is a common
 associated feature of depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders, generalized anxiety disorder
 may be diagnosed comorbidly if the anxiety/worry is sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
 attention.

