Differential Diagnosis
 Only limited-symptom panic attacks.
 Panic disorder should not be diagnosed if full-symptom
 (unexpected) panic attacks have never been experienced. In the case of only limited-symptom
 unexpected panic attacks, an other specified anxiety disorder or unspecified anxiety disorder
 diagnosis should be considered.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic
 attacks are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Examples of medical conditions that can cause panic attacks include hyperthyroidism,
 hyperparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure
 241
 disorders, and cardiopulmonary conditions (e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia,
 asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]). Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g.,
 serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism; Holter monitor for arrhythmias) or physical
 examinations (e.g., for cardiac conditions) may be helpful in determining the etiological role of
 another medical condition. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical
 symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel
 control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition or a
 substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
 Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic attacks
 are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a substance. Intoxication with central
 nervous system stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine-type substances, caffeine) or cannabis
 and withdrawal from central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can
 precipitate a panic attack.
 However, if panic attacks continue to occur outside of the context of substance use (e.g., long
 after the effects of intoxication or withdrawal have ended), a diagnosis of panic disorder should
 be considered. In addition, because panic disorder may precede substance use in some
 individuals and may be associated with increased substance use, especially for purposes of self
medication, a detailed history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks
 prior to excessive substance use. If this is the case, a diagnosis of panic disorder should be
 considered in addition to a diagnosis of substance use disorder. Features such as onset after age
 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of
 consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility
 that another medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
 Other mental disorders with panic attacks as an associated feature (e.g., other anxiety disorders
 and psychotic disorders).
 Panic attacks that occur as a symptom of other anxiety disorders are expected (e.g., triggered by
social situations in social anxiety disorder, by phobic objects or situations in specific phobia or
 agoraphobia, by worry in generalized anxiety disorder, by separation from home or attachment
 figures in separation anxiety disorder) and thus would not meet criteria for panic disorder. (Note:
 Sometimes an unexpected panic attack is associated with the onset of another anxiety disorder,
 but then the attacks become expected, whereas panic disorder is characterized by recurrent
 unexpected panic attacks.) If the panic attacks occur only in response to specific triggers, then
 only the relevant anxiety disorder is assigned. However, if the individual experiences unexpected
 panic attacks as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of
 the attacks, then an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.

