Differential Diagnosis
 Normative shyness.
 Shyness (i.e., social reticence) is a common personality trait and is not by
 itself pathological. In some societies, shyness is even evaluated positively. However, when there
 is a significant adverse impact on social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning,
 a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be considered, and when full diagnostic criteria for
 social anxiety disorder are met, the disorder should be diagnosed. Only a minority (12%) of self
identified shy individuals in the United States have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for
 social anxiety disorder.
 Agoraphobia.
 Individuals with agoraphobia may fear and avoid social situations (e.g., going to a
 movie) because escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of
 incapacitation or panic-like symptoms, whereas individuals with social anxiety disorder are most
 fearful of scrutiny by others. Moreover, individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely to be
 calm when left entirely alone, which is often not the case in agoraphobia.
 234
 Panic disorder.
 Individuals with social anxiety disorder may have panic attacks, but the panic
 attacks are always cued by social situations and do not occur “out of the blue.” Additionally,
 individuals with social anxiety disorder are more likely to be distressed by fear of negative
 evaluation stemming from a panic attack than by the panic attacks themselves.
 Generalized anxiety disorder.
 Social worries are common in generalized anxiety disorder, but the
 focus is more on the nature of ongoing relationships rather than on fear of negative evaluation.
Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder, particularly children, may have excessive worries
 about the quality of their social performance, but these worries also pertain to nonsocial
 performance and when the individual is not being evaluated by others. In social anxiety disorder,
 the worries focus on social performance and others’ evaluation.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder may avoid social settings
 (including school refusal) because of concerns about being separated from attachment figures or,
 in children, about requiring the presence of a parent when it is not developmentally appropriate.
 Individuals with separation anxiety disorder are usually comfortable in social settings when their
 attachment figure is present or when they are at home, whereas those with social anxiety disorder
 may be uncomfortable when social situations occur at home or in the presence of attachment
 figures.
 Specific phobias.
 Individuals with specific phobias may fear embarrassment or humiliation (e.g.,
 embarrassment about fainting when they have their blood drawn), but they do not generally fear
 negative evaluation in other social situations.
 Selective mutism.
 Individuals with selective mutism may fail to speak because of fear of negative
 evaluation, but they do not fear negative evaluation in social situations where no speaking is
 required (e.g., nonverbal play).
 Major depressive disorder.
 Individuals with major depressive disorder may be concerned about
 being negatively evaluated by others because they feel they are bad or not worthy of being liked.
 In contrast, individuals with social anxiety disorder are worried about being negatively evaluated
 because of certain social behaviors or physical symptoms.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are preoccupied with one
 or more perceived defects or flaws in their physical appearance that are not observable or appear
 slight to others; this preoccupation often causes social anxiety and avoidance. If their social fears
 and avoidance are caused only by their beliefs about their appearance, a separate diagnosis of
 social anxiety disorder is not warranted.
 Delusional disorder.
 Individuals with delusional disorder may have nonbizarre delusions and/or
 hallucinations related to the delusional theme that focus on being rejected by or offending others.
 Although extent of insight into beliefs about social situations may vary, many individuals with
 social anxiety disorder have good insight that their beliefs are out of proportion to the actual
 threat posed by the social situation.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Social anxiety and social communication deficits are hallmarks of
 autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with social anxiety disorder typically have adequate age
appropriate social relationships and social communication capacity, although they may appear to
 have impairment in these areas when first interacting with unfamiliar peers or adults.
 Personality disorders.
 Given its frequent onset in childhood and its persistence into and through
 adulthood, social anxiety disorder may resemble a personality disorder. The most apparent
 overlap is with avoidant personality disorder. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder have
 a broader avoidance pattern and higher rates of impairment than those individuals with social
 anxiety disorder. Moreover, individuals with avoidant personality disorder have a strong and
 pervasively negative self-concept, a view of rejection as equating to a global evaluation of the
 self as being of little worth, and a sense of not fitting in
Other mental disorders.
 Other medical conditions.
 Oppositional defiant disorder.
 F41.0
 235
 socially that dates from early childhood. Nonetheless, social anxiety disorder is typically more
 comorbid with avoidant personality disorder than with any other personality disorder, and
 avoidant personality disorder is more comorbid with social anxiety disorder than with any other
 anxiety disorder.
 Social fears and discomfort can occur as part of schizophrenia, but other
 evidence for psychotic symptoms is usually present. In individuals with an eating disorder, it is
 important to determine that fear of negative evaluation about eating disorder symptoms or
 behaviors (e.g., purging and vomiting) is not the sole source of social anxiety before applying a
 diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Similarly, obsessive-compulsive disorder may be associated
 with social anxiety, but the additional diagnosis of social anxiety disorder is used only when
 social fears and avoidance are independent of the foci of the obsessions and compulsions.
 Medical conditions may produce symptoms that may be embarrassing
 (e.g., trembling in Parkinson’s disease). When the fear of negative evaluation due to other
 medical conditions is judged to be excessive, a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be
 considered.
 Refusal to speak because of opposition to authority figures should be
 differentiated from failure to speak because of fear of negative evaluation.


