Differential Diagnosis
 Agoraphobia.
 Situational specific phobia may resemble agoraphobia in its clinical presentation,
 given the overlap in feared situations (e.g., flying, enclosed places, elevators). If an individual
 fears only one of the agoraphobic situations, then specific phobia, situational, may be diagnosed.
 If two or more agoraphobic situations are feared, a diagnosis of agoraphobia is likely warranted.
 For example, an individual who fears airplanes and elevators (which overlap with the “public
 transportation” agoraphobic situation) but does not fear other agoraphobic situations would be
 diagnosed with specific phobia, situational, whereas an individual who fears airplanes, elevators,
 and crowds (which overlap with two agoraphobic situations, “using public transportation” and
 “standing in line or being in a crowd”) would be diagnosed with agoraphobia. Criterion B of
 agoraphobia (the situations are feared or avoided “because of thoughts that escape might be
 difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic-like symptoms or other
 incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms”) can also be useful in differentiating agoraphobia
 from specific phobia. If the situations are feared for reasons other than not being able to escape
 or get help, such as fear of being harmed directly by the object or situation (e.g., fear of the plane
 crashing, fear of the animal biting), a specific phobia diagnosis may be more appropriate.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 If the situations are feared because of negative evaluation, social anxiety
 disorder should be diagnosed instead of specific phobia.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 If the situations are feared because of separation from a primary
 caregiver or attachment figure, separation anxiety disorder should be diagnosed instead of
 specific phobia.
 229
 Panic disorder.
 Individuals with specific phobia may experience panic attacks when confronted
 with their feared situation or object. A diagnosis of specific phobia would be given if the panic
 attacks only occurred in response to the specific object or situation, whereas a diagnosis of panic
 disorder would be given if the individual also experienced panic attacks that were unexpected
 (i.e., not in response to the specific phobia object or situation).
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 If an individual’s primary fear or anxiety is of an object or
 situation as a result of obsessions (e.g., fear of blood due to obsessive thoughts about
 contamination from blood-borne pathogens [i.e., HIV]; fear of driving due to obsessive images
 of harming others), and if other diagnostic criteria for obsessive-compulsive disorder are met,
 then obsessive-compulsive disorder should be diagnosed.
Trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
 Eating disorders.
 Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 F40.10
 If the phobia develops following a traumatic event,
 posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) should be considered as a diagnosis. However, traumatic
 events can precede the onset of PTSD and specific phobia. In this case, a diagnosis of specific
 phobia would be assigned only if all of the criteria for PTSD are not met.
 A diagnosis of specific phobia is not given if the avoidance behavior is
 exclusively limited to avoidance of food and food-related cues, in which case a diagnosis of
 anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa should be considered.
 When the fear and avoidance are attributable
 to delusional thinking (as in schizophrenia or other schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
 disorders), a diagnosis of specific phobia is not warranted.



 