Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Anxiety symptoms commonly occur in substance
 intoxication and substance withdrawal. The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or
 substance-specific withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A
 diagnosis of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder either with onset during intoxication
or with onset during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication
 or substance withdrawal when the panic or anxiety symptoms are predominant in the clinical
 picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention. For example, panic or anxiety
 symptoms are characteristic of alcohol withdrawal.
 Independent anxiety disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance/medication).
 disorder 
co-occurring 
An independent anxiety
 with substance/medication use is distinguished from a
 substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder by the fact that even though a
 substance/medication may be taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related
 to the anxiety symptoms, the anxiety symptoms are observed at times other than during
 substance/medication use (i.e., preceding the onset of substance/medication use or persisting for
 a substantial period of time after substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, or medication
 use) and would warrant the diagnosis of an independent anxiety disorder.
 Delirium.
 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
 If panic or anxiety symptoms occur exclusively during the course of delirium, they are
 considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed separately.
 If the panic or anxiety symptoms are attributed to
 the physiological consequences of another medical condition (i.e., rather than to the medication
 taken for the medical condition), anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be
 diagnosed. The history often provides the basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the
 treatment for the other medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
 be needed to determine whether the medication is the causative agent (in which case the
 symptoms may be better explained by substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder). If the
 disturbance is attributable to both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses
 (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced
 anxiety disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the
 panic or anxiety symptoms are attributable to a substance/medication or to another medical
 condition or are primary (i.e., not attributable to either a substance or another medical condition),
 a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified anxiety disorder would be indicated.


 