Stimulant Withdrawal
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Cessation of (or reduction in) prolonged amphetamine-type substance, cocaine,
 or other stimulant use.
 B. Dysphoric mood and two (or more) of the following physiological changes,
 developing within a few hours to several days after Criterion A:
 1. Fatigue.
 2. Vivid, unpleasant dreams.
 3. Insomnia or hypersomnia.
 4. Increased appetite.
 5. Psychomotor retardation or agitation.
 C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
 withdrawal from another substance.
 Specify the particular substance that causes the withdrawal syndrome (i.e.,
 amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant).
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether the stimulant is an
Stimulant-induced mental disorders.
 amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant and on whether or not
 there is a comorbid amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant use
 disorder. If mild amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder is
 comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.13. If moderate or severe amphetamine-type
 substance or other stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
 F15.23. For amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant withdrawal occurring in
 the absence of amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder (e.g., in
 a patient taking amphetamine solely under appropriate medical supervision), the
 ICD-10-CM code is F15.93. If mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
 code is F14.13. If moderate or severe cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10
CM code is F14.23. For cocaine withdrawal occurring in the absence of a cocaine
 use disorder, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.93.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of stimulant withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
 syndrome that develops within a few hours to several days after the cessation of (or marked
 reduction in) stimulant use (generally high dose) that has been prolonged (Criterion A). The
 withdrawal syndrome is characterized by the development of dysphoric mood accompanied by
 two or more of the following physiological changes: fatigue, vivid and unpleasant dreams,
 insomnia or hypersomnia, increased appetite, and psychomotor retardation or agitation (Criterion
 B). Bradycardia is often present and is a reliable measure of stimulant withdrawal.
 Anhedonia and drug craving can often be present but are not part of the diagnostic criteria.
 These symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
 other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to
 another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
 644
 Associated Features
 Acute withdrawal symptoms (“a crash”) are often seen after periods of repetitive high-dose use
 (“runs” or “binges”). These symptoms are characterized by intense and unpleasant feelings of
 lassitude and depression and increased appetite, generally requiring several days of rest and
 recuperation. Depressive symptoms with suicidal thoughts or behavior can occur and are
 generally the most serious problems seen during “crashing” or other forms of stimulant
 withdrawal. Many individuals with stimulant use disorder may experience a withdrawal
 syndrome at some point.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Stimulant withdrawal is distinguished from stimulant-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., stimulant-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal)
 because the symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in these latter disorders are in excess of those
 usually associated with stimulant withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are
 severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of stimulant withdrawal with stimulant use disorder, see
 “Comorbidity” under Stimulant Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that
 are likely to be encountered.