 Stimulant Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent use of an amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant.
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
 euphoria or affective blunting; changes in sociability; hypervigilance;
 interpersonal sensitivity; anxiety, tension, or anger; stereotyped behaviors;
 impaired judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, use of a stimulant.
 C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms, developing during, or shortly
 after, stimulant use:
 1. Tachycardia or bradycardia.
 2. Pupillary dilation.
 3. Elevated or lowered blood pressure.
 4. Perspiration or chills.
 5. Nausea or vomiting.
 6. Evidence of weight loss.
 7. Psychomotor agitation or retardation.
 8. Muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac
 arrhythmias.
 9. Confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
641
 Specify the particular intoxicant (i.e., amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or
 other stimulant).
 Specify if:
 With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted when
 hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions
 occur in the absence of a delirium.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether the stimulant is an
 amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant; whether there is a
 comorbid amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant use disorder;
 and whether or not there are perceptual disturbances.
 For amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant intoxication,
 without perceptual disturbances: If a mild amphetamine-type substance or
 other stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.120, and if
 a moderate or severe amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use
 disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.220. If there is no comorbid
 amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder, then the ICD-10
CM code is F15.920. Similarly, if a mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the
 ICD-10-CM code is F14.120, and if a moderate or severe cocaine use disorder is
 comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.220. If there is no comorbid cocaine use
 disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F14.920.
 For amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant intoxication,
 with perceptual disturbances: If a mild amphetamine-type substance or other
 stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.122, and if a
 moderate or severe amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use
 disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.222. If there is no comorbid
 amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder, then the ICD-10
CM code is F15.922. Similarly, if a mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the
 ICD-10-CM code is F14.122, and if a moderate or severe cocaine use disorder is
 comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.222. If there is no comorbid cocaine use
 disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F14.922.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of stimulant intoxication, related to amphetamine-type substances and
 cocaine, is the presence of clinically significant behavioral or psychological changes that develop
 during, or shortly after, use of stimulants (Criteria A and B). Auditory hallucinations may be
 prominent, as may paranoid ideation, and these symptoms must be distinguished from an
 independent psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia. Stimulant intoxication usually begins with
 a “high” feeling and includes one or more of the following: euphoria with enhanced vigor,
 gregariousness, 
hyperactivity, 
restlessness, 
hypervigilance, 
interpersonal 
sensitivity,
 talkativeness, anxiety, tension, alertness, grandiosity, stereotyped and repetitive behavior, anger,
 impaired judgment, and, in the case of chronic intoxication, affective blunting with fatigue or
sadness and social withdrawal. These behavioral and psychological changes are accompanied by
 two or more of the following signs and symptoms that develop during or shortly after stimulant
 use: tachycardia or bradycardia; pupillary dilation; elevated or lowered blood pressure;
 perspiration or chills; nausea or vomiting; evidence of weight loss; psychomotor agitation or
 retardation; muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac arrhythmias; and
 confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma (Criterion C). Intoxication, either acute or
 chronic, is often associated with impaired social or occupational functioning. Severe intoxication
 can lead to convulsions, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperpyrexia, and death. For the diagnosis of
 stimulant intoxication to be made, the symptoms must not be attributable to another medical
 condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
 642
 (Criterion D). While stimulant intoxication occurs in individuals with stimulant use disorders,
 intoxication is not a criterion for stimulant use disorder, which is confirmed by the presence of 2
 of the 11 diagnostic criteria for use disorder.
 Associated Features
 The magnitude and direction of the behavioral and physiological changes depend on many
 variables, including the dose used and the characteristics of the individual using the substance or
 the context (e.g., tolerance, rate of absorption, chronicity of use, context in which taken).
 Stimulant effects such as euphoria, increased pulse and blood pressure, and psychomotor activity
 are most commonly seen. Depressant effects such as sadness, bradycardia, decreased blood
 pressure, and decreased psychomotor activity are less common and generally emerge only with
 chronic high-dose use.
 Prevalence
 Although prevalence of stimulant intoxication is not known, prevalence of stimulant use can be
 used as a proxy. Many individuals who use stimulants may not have symptoms that fully meet
 the criteria for stimulant intoxication, which requires “clinically significant problematic
 behavioral or psychological changes.” Thus, rates of stimulant use can be considered the upper
 bounds of the likely prevalence of stimulant intoxication.
 Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use in the United States is 2.2% for individuals
 age 12 and older (0.5% among individuals ages 12–17-years, 6.2% among individuals ages 18
25 years, and 1.7% among individuals age 26 and older); 3% of men/boys and 1.4% of
 women/girls used cocaine in the last 12 months. Twelve-month prevalence of cocaine use is
 2.3% among Whites, 2.2% among Hispanics, 1.7% among African Americans, and 1% among
 Asian Americans.
 Estimated 12-month prevalence of methamphetamine use in the United States is 0.6% for
 individuals age 12 and older (0.2% among individuals ages 12–17 years, 1.1% among
 individuals ages 18–25 years, and 0.6% among individuals age 26 and older). Twelve-month
 prevalence of methamphetamine use is 0.8% among men/boys and 0.4% among women/girls.
 Twelve-month prevalence of methamphetamine use is 0.7% among Whites, 0.6% among
 Hispanics, 0.2% among African Americans, and 0.1% among Asian Americans. Small sample
Stimulant-induced mental disorders.
 Independent mental disorders.
 sizes make estimating rates among American Indians/Alaskan Natives difficult.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Stimulant intoxication is distinguished from stimulant-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., stimulant-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication)
 because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in the latter disorders are in excess of those usually seen in
 stimulant intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and meet full criteria for the
 relevant disorder.
 Salient mental disturbances associated with stimulant intoxication
 should be distinguished from the symptoms of schizophrenia, bipolar and depressive disorders,
 generalized anxiety disorder, and panic disorder as described in this manual.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of stimulant intoxication with stimulant use disorder, see
 “Comorbidity” under Stimulant Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that
 are likely to be encountered.
 643