 Stimulant Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A pattern of amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant use
 leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least
two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
 1. The stimulant is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
 was intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 stimulant use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the stimulant,
 use the stimulant, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the stimulant.
 5. Recurrent stimulant use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
 work, school, or home.
 6. Continued stimulant use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the stimulant.
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of stimulant use.
 633
 8. Recurrent stimulant use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
 9. Stimulant use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by the stimulant.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the stimulant to achieve
 intoxication or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 the stimulant.
 Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking stimulant
 medications solely under appropriate medical supervision, such as
 medications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or narcolepsy.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the stimulant (refer to Criteria
 A and B of the criteria set for stimulant withdrawal).
 b. The stimulant (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
 withdrawal symptoms.
 Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking stimulant
 medications solely under appropriate medical supervision, such as
 medications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or narcolepsy.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for stimulant use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for stimulant use disorder have been met for at least 3
 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the stimulant,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for stimulant use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for stimulant use disorder have been met at
 any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
 A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the stimulant,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to stimulants is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If an amphetamine-type substance
 intoxication, amphetamine-type substance withdrawal, or amphetamine-type
 substance-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for
 amphetamine-type substance use disorder. Instead, the comorbid amphetamine
type substance use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the amphetamine
type substance-induced disorder code (see the coding note for amphetamine-type
 substance intoxication, amphetamine-type substance withdrawal, or a specific
 amphetamine-type substance-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is
 comorbid amphetamine-induced depressive disorder and amphetamine use
 disorder, only the amphetamine-induced depressive disorder code is given, with the
 4th character indicating whether the comorbid amphetamine use disorder is mild,
 moderate, or severe: F15.14 for mild amphetamine use disorder with amphetamine
induced depressive disorder or F15.24 for a moderate or severe amphetamine use
 disorder with amphetamine-induced depressive disorder. (The instructions for
 amphetamine-type substance also apply to other or unspecified stimulant
 intoxication, other or unspecified stimulant withdrawal, and other or unspecified
 stimulant-induced mental disorder.) Similarly, if there is comorbid cocaine-induced
 depressive disorder and cocaine use disorder, only the cocaine-induced depressive
 disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid
 cocaine use disorder is mild, moderate,
 634
 or severe: F14.14 for a mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive
 disorder or F14.24 for a moderate or severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine
induced depressive disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F15.10 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.10 Cocaine
 F15.10 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Mild, In early remission
 F15.11 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.11 Cocaine
F15.11 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Mild, In sustained remission
 F15.11 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.11 Cocaine
 F15.11 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F15.20 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.20 Cocaine
 F15.20 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Moderate, In early remission
 F15.21 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.21 Cocaine
 F15.21 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F15.21 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.21 Cocaine
 F15.21 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F15.20 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.20 Cocaine
 F15.20 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Severe, In early remission
 F15.21 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.21 Cocaine
 F15.21 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Severe, In sustained remission
 F15.21 Amphetamine-type substance
 F14.21 Cocaine
 F15.21 Other or unspecified stimulant
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 635
Diagnostic Features
 Stimulants are a type of psychoactive substance that increases activity in the brain and can
 temporarily elevate alertness, mood, and awareness. Stimulants covered in this chapter include
 amphetamine and prescription stimulants with similar effects (e.g., methylphenidate) and
 cocaine. Substance-related disorders involving certain other substances with stimulant properties
 are classified in other sections of this chapter. These include caffeine (in caffeine-related
 disorders), 
nicotine 
(in 
tobacco-related 
disorders), 
and 
MDMA (3,4
methylenedioxymethamphetamine; in other hallucinogen-related disorders), which has both
 stimulant and hallucinogenic effects.
 Given that the effects of amphetamine-type substances are similar to those of cocaine,
 amphetamine-related disorders and cocaine-related disorders are grouped under the single rubric
 “stimulant-related disorders.” Amphetamine-type substances (and other or unspecified
 stimulants) and cocaine have different ICD-10-CM codes (e.g., F15.10 mild amphetamine-type
 substance use disorder, F14.10 mild cocaine use disorder). The particular stimulant used by the
 individual is recorded in the diagnosis (e.g., “methamphetamine withdrawal,” “methylphenidate
 use disorder,” “cocaine intoxication”).
 The amphetamine-type substances include stimulants with a substituted phenylethylamine
 structure, such as amphetamine, dextroamphetamine, and methamphetamine. Also included are
 substances that are structurally different but have similar effects, such as methylphenidate,
 modafinil, and armodafinil. These amphetamine-type substances are usually taken orally or
 intravenously, although methamphetamine is also taken by the nasal route. In addition to the
 synthetic amphetamine-type compounds, there are naturally occurring, plant-derived stimulants
 such as khât, as well as synthetic chemical khât analogs, called cathinones.
 Amphetamines and other stimulants may be obtained by prescription for the treatment of
 obesity, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and narcolepsy. Consequently, prescribed
 stimulants may be diverted into the illegal market.
 Cocaine, a naturally occurring substance produced by the coca plant, is consumed in several
 preparations (e.g., coca leaves, coca paste, cocaine hydrochloride, and cocaine alkaloids such as
 freebase and crack) that differ in potency because of varying levels of purity and speed of onset.
 However, in all of the forms, cocaine is the active ingredient. Cocaine hydrochloride powder is
 usually “snorted” through the nostrils or dissolved in water and injected intravenously. Crack and
 other cocaine alkaloids are easily vaporized and inhaled, and thus their effects have an extremely
 rapid onset.
 Individuals exposed to amphetamine-type substances or cocaine can develop stimulant use
 disorder as rapidly as 1 week, although the onset is not always this rapid. Regardless of the route
 of administration, tolerance occurs with repeated use. Withdrawal symptoms, particularly
 hypersomnia, increased appetite, and dysphoria, can occur and can enhance craving. Most
 individuals with stimulant use disorder have experienced tolerance or withdrawal.
 Use patterns and course are similar for disorders involving amphetamine-type substances and
 cocaine, as both are potent central nervous system stimulants with similar psychoactive and
 sympathomimetic effects. Amphetamine-type substances are longer acting than cocaine and thus
 are used fewer times per day. Usage may be chronic or episodic, with binges punctuated by brief
 non-use periods. Aggressive or violent behavior is common when high doses are smoked,
 ingested, or administered intravenously. Intense temporary anxiety resembling panic disorder or
generalized anxiety disorder, as well as paranoid ideation and psychotic episodes that resemble
 schizophrenia, is seen with high-dose use.
 Withdrawal states are associated with temporary but intense depressive symptoms that can
 resemble a major depressive episode; the depressive symptoms usually resolve
 636
 within 1 week. Tolerance to amphetamine-type substances develops and leads to escalation
 of the dose. Conversely, some users of amphetamine-type substances develop sensitization,
 characterized by enhanced effects.
 Associated Features
 When injected or smoked, stimulants typically produce an instant feeling of well-being,
 confidence, and euphoria. Dramatic behavioral changes can rapidly develop with stimulant use
 disorder. Chaotic behavior, social isolation, aggressive behavior, and sexual dysfunction can
 result from long-term stimulant use disorder.
 Individuals with acute intoxication may present with rambling speech, headache, transient
 ideas of reference, and tinnitus. There may be paranoid ideation, auditory hallucinations in a
 clear sensorium, and tactile hallucinations, which the individual usually recognizes as drug
 effects. Threats or acting out of aggressive behavior may occur. Depression, suicidal thoughts,
 irritability, anhedonia, emotional lability, or disturbances in attention and concentration
 commonly occur during withdrawal. Mental disturbances associated with cocaine use usually
 resolve hours to days after cessation of use but can persist for 1 month. Physiological changes
 during stimulant withdrawal are opposite to those of the intoxication phase, sometimes including
 bradycardia. Temporary depressive symptoms may meet symptomatic and duration criteria for
 major depressive episode. Histories consistent with repeated panic attacks, social anxiety
 disorder–like behavior, and generalized anxiety–like syndromes are common, as are eating
 disorders. One extreme instance of stimulant toxicity is stimulant-induced psychotic disorder, a
 disorder that resembles schizophrenia, with delusions and hallucinations.
 Individuals with stimulant use disorder often develop conditioned responses to drug-related
 stimuli (e.g., craving on seeing any white powderlike substance). These responses contribute to
 relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and persist after detoxification.
 Depressive symptoms with suicidal thoughts or behavior can occur and are generally the
 most serious problems seen during stimulant withdrawal.
 Prevalence
 Stimulant use disorder: amphetamine-type substances.
 Estimated 
12-month 
prevalence 
of
 amphetamine-type substance use disorder in the United States is 0.4% among individuals 12
 years and older. Twelve-month prevalence is 0.1% among individuals ages 12–17 years, 0.5%
 among those ages 18–25, and 0.4% among those age 26 and older. Rates are 0.5% for men and
 0.2% for women, overall. Rates are approximately 0.4% among Hispanics and non-Hispanic
 Whites and 0.1% among African Americans and Asian Americans. Prevalence estimates for
 American Indian/Alaskan Natives and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander populations are difficult
 to determine, given small sample sizes, but there is some evidence for higher rates in American
Indians/Alaskan Natives.
 Among U.S. adults, 6.6% (annual average) used prescription stimulants overall; 4.5% used
 without misuse, 1.9% misused without use disorders, and 0.2% had use disorders. While non
Hispanic Whites are more likely to use prescription stimulants nonmedically, Hispanics tend to
 use them more frequently and have higher rates of prescription stimulant use disorder.
 Stimulant use disorder: cocaine.
 Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use disorder in the
 United States is 0.4% among individuals 12 years and older. Rates are 0.1% among individuals
 ages 12–17 years, 0.7% among those ages 18–25 years, and 0.3% among those age 26 and older.
 Rates are 0.5% for men and 0.2% for women, overall. Rates are 0.4% among African Americans
 and non-Hispanic Whites, 0.3% in Hispanics, and < 0.1% among Asian Americans.
 637
 Development and Course
 In the United States, stimulant use disorder occurs throughout all levels of society and is more
 common among individuals ages 18–25 years compared with individuals ages 12–17 or 26 years
 and older. On average, first regular use among individuals in treatment occurs at approximately
 age 23 years. For primary methamphetamine treatment admissions, the average age is 34 years,
 and for primary cocaine treatment admissions, the average age is 44 years for smoked cocaine
 and 37 years for other routes.
 Some persons begin stimulant use to control weight or to improve performance in school,
 work, or athletics. Initial use may include obtaining medications such as methylphenidate or
 amphetamine salts prescribed to others for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
 disorder. Among primary treatment admissions for amphetamine-type substance use in the
 United States, 61% reported smoking, 26% reported injecting, and 9% reported snorting,
 suggesting that stimulant use disorder can develop from multiple modes of administration.
 Patterns of stimulant administration include episodic or daily (or almost daily) use. Episodic
 use (e.g., intense use over a weekend or on one or more weekdays) tends to be separated by 2 or
 more days of nonuse. “Binges” involve continuous high-dose use over hours or days and are
 often associated with physical dependence. Binges usually terminate only when stimulant
 supplies are depleted or exhaustion ensues. Chronic daily use may involve high or low doses,
 often with an increase in dose over time.
 Stimulant smoking and intravenous use are associated with rapid progression to severe-level
 stimulant use disorder, often occurring over weeks to months. Intranasal use of cocaine and oral
 use of amphetamine-type substances result in more gradual progression occurring over months to
 years. With continued use, there is a diminution of pleasurable effects because of tolerance and
 an increase in dysphoric effects.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Comorbid bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, antisocial personality disorder, and
 other substance use disorders are risk factors for developing stimulant use disorder and for
 relapse to cocaine use in treatment samples. Higher stress reactivity has been correlated with
 frequency of cocaine use in some U.S. treatment samples. Conduct disorder in childhood and
 antisocial personality disorder are associated with the development of stimulant-related
disorders. In the United States, previous use of another substance, being male, having a Cluster B
 personality disorder, family history of substance use disorder, and being separated, divorced, or
 widowed all result in increased risk of using cocaine. Men who have sex with men are also at
 higher risk for methamphetamine use.
 Environmental.
 Predictors of cocaine use among a cohort of U.S. teenagers include prenatal
 cocaine exposure, postnatal cocaine use by parents, and exposure to community violence during
 childhood. Research in industrialized countries suggests that exposure to intimate partner
 violence or childhood mistreatment often co-occurs with stimulant use, especially in women. In a
 cohort of U.S. women followed up longitudinally, socioeconomic status, including food
 insecurity, had a dose-dependent effect on risk of stimulant use. For youth, especially girls, risk
 factors include living in an unstable home environment, having a psychiatric condition, criminal
 behavior, and associating with dealers and users.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The prevalence of cocaine use in the United States increased between 2001–2002 and 2012
2013 among non-Latinx Whites, African Americans, and Latinx, but the prevalence of cocaine
 use disorder increased only among Whites. Despite small variations, cocaine and other stimulant
 use disorder diagnostic criteria perform equally across gender and
 638
 ethnoracial groups. In limited data on prevalence estimates, it appears that American
 Indian/Alaskan Native populations are at higher risk for methamphetamine use disorder, and, to
 a lesser degree, cocaine use disorder, than are non-Hispanic Whites, while native
 Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders appear to have similar risks to non-Hispanic Whites.
 Approximately 64% of individuals admitted to publicly funded substance abuse treatment
 programs for primary methamphetamine/amphetamine-related disorders are non-Hispanic White,
 followed by 20% of Hispanic origin, 3% Asian and Pacific Islander, and 6% non-Hispanic
 Black. Among individuals admitted for primary treatment related to smoked cocaine, 51% were
 non-Hispanic Black, 35% non-Hispanic White, 8% Hispanic, and 1% Asian/Pacific Islander. For
 admissions related to other routes of cocaine administration, 47% were non-Hispanic White,
 31% were non-Hispanic Black, 17% were of Hispanic origin, and 1% were Asian/Pacific
 Islander. Rates of disorders in clinical samples should be interpreted with caution because they
 may be affected by differential access to and utilization of services, pathways to care,
 criminalization, stigma, and racial bias in diagnosis and referral for treatment.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In the United States, women with cocaine use disorder more frequently have comorbid
 psychiatric disorders, such as depression and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), compared
 with men. Gonadal hormones affect a male’s responses to cocaine. Females with cocaine use
 disorder and higher levels of progesterone have lower stress-induced and cue-induced cocaine
 craving and lower cue-induced changes in blood pressure than females with cocaine use disorder
 and lower levels of progesterone. This may explain why use of cocaine in pregnant females is
 lower than in nonpregnant females.
Diagnostic Markers
 Benzoylecgonine, a metabolite of cocaine, typically remains in the urine for 1–3 days after a
 single dose and may be present for 7–12 days in individuals using repeated high doses. Mildly
 elevated liver function tests can be present in cocaine injectors or users with concomitant alcohol
 use. There are no neurobiological markers of diagnostic utility. Discontinuation of chronic
 cocaine use may be associated with electroencephalographic changes, suggesting persistent
 abnormalities; alterations in secretion patterns of prolactin; and downregulation of dopamine
 receptors.
 Short-half-life amphetamine-type substances (e.g., methamphetamine) can be detected for 1
3 days, and possibly up to 4 days depending on dosage and metabolism. Hair samples can be
 used to detect presence of amphetamine-type substances for up to 90 days. Other laboratory
 findings, as well as physical findings and other medical conditions (e.g., weight loss,
 malnutrition; poor hygiene), are similar for both cocaine and amphetamine-type substance use
 disorder.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Few data on the association of stimulant use disorders and suicide are available because most
 studies examining suicidal thoughts and behavior examine use of stimulants rather than stimulant
 use disorders. One systematic review found that regular or problem amphetamine use (examining
 primarily individuals who inject amphetamines and/or individuals admitted to treatment for use
 of amphetamines) is associated with increased suicide mortality. A general population study of
 adults in the United States found an association of prescription stimulant use disorder with
 suicidal thoughts. In a study of individuals admitted to substance use treatment, those with
 cocaine use disorder were much more likely to report suicidal thoughts than those with other
 substance use disorders. In a study of both men and women in the U.S. Veterans Administration
 health care system,
 639
 cocaine and amphetamine use disorders were each associated with increased rates of suicide
 deaths.
 Functional Consequences of Stimulant Use Disorder
 Various medical conditions may occur depending on the route of administration. Intranasal users
 often develop sinusitis, irritation, bleeding of the nasal mucosa, and a perforated nasal septum.
 Individuals who smoke stimulants are at increased risk for respiratory problems (e.g., coughing,
 bronchitis, and pneumonitis). Injectors have puncture marks and “tracks,” most commonly on
 their forearms. Risk of HIV and hepatitis C infection increases with frequent intravenous
 injections and unsafe sexual activity. Other sexually transmitted diseases, hepatitis B, and
 tuberculosis and other lung infections are also seen. Weight loss and malnutrition are common.
 Chest pain may be a common symptom during stimulant intoxication. Myocardial infarction,
 palpitations and arrhythmias, sudden death from respiratory or cardiac arrest, and stroke have
 been associated with stimulant use among young and otherwise healthy individuals.
 Pneumothorax can result from performing Valsalva-like maneuvers done to better absorb inhaled
smoke. Cocaine use is associated with irregularities in placental blood flow, abruptio placentae,
 premature labor and delivery, and an increased prevalence of infants with very low birth weights.
 Individuals with stimulant use disorder may become involved in theft, prostitution, or drug
 dealing in order to acquire drugs or money for drugs. Traumatic injuries due to violent behavior
 are common among individuals trafficking drugs.
 Neurocognitive impairment is common among both methamphetamine and cocaine users,
 including deficits related to attention, impulsivity, verbal learning/memory, working memory,
 and executive functioning. Transient psychosis and seizure have also been reported with chronic
 use of either cocaine or methamphetamine, possibly related to patterns of use or the exacerbation
 of preexisting vulnerabilities. Amphetamine use can cause toxic effects related to elevated body
 temperature, and there is some evidence that chronic use causes neuroinflammation and
 neurotoxicity in dopaminergic neurons. Oral health problems include “meth mouth” with gum
 disease, tooth decay, and mouth sores related to the toxic effects of smoking the drug and to
 bruxism while intoxicated. Adverse pulmonary effects appear to be less common for
 amphetamine-type substances because they are smoked fewer times per day, although
 methamphetamine use is still associated with a risk of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
 Emergency department visits are common for stimulant-related mental disorder symptoms,
 injury, skin infections, and dental pathology. In the United States, diagnosis of a stimulant use
 disorder is associated with a 20% increase in 30-day readmission rates in assessment of follow
up after hospitalization for “any cause” (a standard measure of overall hospital quality of care).
 Differential Diagnosis
 Phencyclidine intoxication.
 Intoxication with phencyclidine (PCP or “angel dust”) or synthetic
 “designer drugs” such as mephedrone (known by different names, including “bath salts”) may
 cause a similar clinical picture and can only be distinguished from stimulant intoxication by the
 presence of cocaine or amphetamine-type substance metabolites in a urine or plasma sample.
 Stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, and stimulant-induced mental disorders.
 Stimulant 
use
 disorder is differentiated from stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, and stimulant
induced mental disorders (e.g., stimulant-induced depressive disorder) in that stimulant use
 disorder describes a problematic pattern of stimulant use that involves impaired control over
 stimulant use, social impairment attributable to stimulant use, risky stimulant use (e.g., continued
 stimulant use despite medical complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development
 of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas stimulant
 640
 intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, and stimulant-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal,
 and stimulant-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with stimulant use
 disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, or a
 stimulant-induced mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of stimulant use
 disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Independent mental disorders.
 Some of the effects of stimulant use may resemble symptoms of
 independent mental disorders, such as psychosis (schizophrenia) and low mood (major
depressive disorder). Discerning whether these behaviors occurred before the intake of the drug
 is important in the differentiation of acute drug effects from a preexisting mental disorder.
 Comorbidity
 Stimulant-related disorders often co-occur with other substance use disorders, especially those
 involving substances with sedative properties, which are often taken to reduce insomnia,
 nervousness, and other unpleasant side effects. Individuals admitted to treatment for cocaine use
 are likely to also use heroin, PCP, or alcohol, and individuals admitted for amphetamine-type
 substance use disorder are likely to use marijuana, heroin, or alcohol. Stimulant use disorder may
 be associated with posttraumatic stress disorder, antisocial personality disorder, attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and gambling disorder. Cardiopulmonary problems are often
 present in individuals seeking treatment for cocaine-related problems, with chest pain being the
 most common. Medical problems occur in response to adulterants used as “cutting” agents.
 Cocaine users who ingest cocaine cut with levamisole, an antimicrobial and veterinary
 medication, may experience agranulocytosis and febrile neutropenia.