Differential Diagnosis
 Adjustment disorders.
 In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any severity rather than of
 the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress disorder. The diagnosis of an
 adjustment disorder is used when the response to a Criterion A event does not meet the criteria
 for acute stress disorder (or another specific mental disorder) and when the symptom pattern of
 acute stress disorder occurs in response to a stressor that does not meet Criterion A for exposure
 to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence (e.g., spouse leaving, being fired).
 For example, severe stress reactions to life-threatening illnesses that may include some acute
 stress disorder symptoms may be more appropriately described as an adjustment disorder. Some
 forms of acute stress response do not include acute stress disorder symptoms and may be
 characterized by anger, depression, or guilt. These responses are more appropriately described as
 primarily an adjustment disorder. Depressive or anger responses in an adjustment disorder may
 involve rumination about the traumatic event, as opposed to involuntary and intrusive distressing
 memories in acute stress disorder.
 Panic disorder.
 Spontaneous panic attacks are very common in acute stress disorder. However,
 panic disorder is diagnosed only if panic attacks are unexpected and there is anxiety about future
 attacks or maladaptive changes in behavior associated with fear of dire consequences of the
 attacks.
 Dissociative disorders.
 Severe dissociative responses (in the absence of characteristic acute stress
 disorder symptoms) may be diagnosed as derealization/depersonalization disorder. If severe
 amnesia of the trauma persists in the absence of characteristic acute stress disorder symptoms,
 the diagnosis of dissociative amnesia may be indicated.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD because the
 symptom pattern in acute stress disorder must resolve within 1 month of the traumatic event. If
 the symptoms persist for more than 1 month and meet criteria for PTSD, the diagnosis is
 changed from acute stress disorder to PTSD.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 In obsessive-compulsive disorder, there are recurrent intrusive
 thoughts, but these meet the definition of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive thoughts are not
 related to an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually present, and other symptoms
 of acute stress disorder are typically absent.
 Psychotic disorders.
 Flashbacks in acute stress disorder must be distinguished from illusions,
Traumatic brain injury.
 hallucinations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophrenia, other
 psychotic disorders, depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, a delirium,
 substance/medication-induced disorders, and psychotic disorders due to another medical
 condition. Acute stress disorder flashbacks are distinguished from these other perceptual
 disturbances by being directly related to the traumatic experience and by occurring in the
 absence of other psychotic or substance-induced features.
 319
 When a brain injury occurs in the context of a traumatic event (e.g.,
 traumatic accident, bomb blast, acceleration/deceleration trauma), symptoms of acute stress
 disorder may appear. An event causing head trauma may also constitute a psychological
 traumatic event, and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms are not mutually exclusive and may
 occur concurrently. Symptoms previously termed postconcussive (e.g., headaches, dizziness,
 sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits) can occur in brain-injured and
 non-brain-injured populations, including individuals with acute stress disorder. Because
 symptoms of acute stress disorder and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a
 differential diagnosis between acute stress disorder and neurocognitive disorder symptoms
 attributable to TBI may be possible based on the presence of symptoms that are distinctive to
 each presentation. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are characteristic of acute stress
 disorder and not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation and confusion are more specific to
 TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to acute stress disorder. Furthermore, differential is aided by
 the fact that symptoms of acute stress disorder persist for up to only 1 month following trauma
 exposure.
 