Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 If an individual has symptoms that meet criteria for a major depressive
 Posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder.
 disorder in response to a stressor, the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is not applicable. The
 symptom profile of major depressive disorder differentiates it from adjustment disorders.
 In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be
 of any severity rather than of the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress
 disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In distinguishing adjustment disorders from
 these two posttraumatic diagnoses, there are both timing and symptom profile considerations.
 Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed immediately and persist up to 6 months after exposure to
 the traumatic event, whereas acute stress disorder can only occur between 3 days and 1 month of
 exposure to the stressor, and PTSD cannot be diagnosed until at least 1 month has passed since
 the occurrence of the traumatic stressor. The required symptom profiles for PTSD and acute
 stress disorder differentiate them from the adjustment disorders. With regard to symptom
 profiles, an adjustment disorder may be diagnosed following a traumatic event when an
 individual exhibits symptoms of either acute stress disorder or PTSD that do not meet or exceed
 the diagnostic threshold for either disorder. Because adjustment disorder cannot persist for more
 than 6 months after termination of the stressor or its consequences, cases in which symptoms
 occurring in response
 322
 to a traumatic event that fall short of the diagnostic threshold for PTSD and that persist for
 longer than 6 months should be diagnosed as other specified trauma- and stressor-related
 disorder. An adjustment disorder should also be diagnosed for individuals who have not been
 exposed to a traumatic event meeting Criterion A for PTSD, but who otherwise exhibit the full
Personality disorders.
 Bereavement.
 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
 Normative stress reactions.
 F43.8
 symptom profile of either acute stress disorder or PTSD.
 With regard to personality disorders, some personality features may be
 associated with a vulnerability to situational distress that may resemble an adjustment disorder.
 The lifetime history of personality functioning will help inform the interpretation of distressed
 behaviors to aid in distinguishing a long-standing personality disorder from an adjustment
 disorder. In addition to some personality disorders incurring vulnerability to distress, stressors
 may also exacerbate personality disorder symptoms. In the presence of a personality disorder, if
 the symptom criteria for an adjustment disorder are met, and the stress-related disturbance
 exceeds what may be attributable to maladaptive personality disorder symptoms (i.e., Criterion C
 is met), then the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder should be made.
 Clinically significant acute bereavement-related distress may sometimes be
 diagnosed as an adjustment disorder if the bereavement is judged to be out of proportion to what
 would be expected or significantly impairs self-care and interpersonal relations. When such
 symptoms persist for more than 12 months after the death, the diagnosis is either prolonged grief
 disorder if full criteria are met or else other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder.
 In psychological factors affecting other
 medical conditions, specific psychological entities (e.g., psychological symptoms, behaviors,
 other factors) exacerbate a medical condition. These psychological factors can precipitate,
 exacerbate, or put an individual at risk for medical illness, or they can worsen an existing
 condition. In contrast, an adjustment disorder is a reaction to the stressor (e.g., having a medical
 illness).
 When bad things happen, most people get upset. This is not an
 adjustment disorder. The diagnosis should only be made when the magnitude of the distress (e.g.,
 alterations in mood, anxiety, or conduct) exceeds what would normally be expected (which may
 vary in different cultures) or when the adverse event precipitates functional impairment.