Differential Diagnosis
 Adjustment disorders.
 In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any severity or type rather
 than a stressor involving exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence
 as required by PTSD Criterion A. The diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is used when the
 response to a stressor that meets PTSD Criterion A does not meet all other PTSD criteria (or
criteria for another mental disorder). An adjustment disorder is also diagnosed when the
 symptom pattern of PTSD occurs in response to a stressor that does not meet PTSD Criterion A
 (e.g., spouse leaving, being fired).
 Other posttraumatic disorders and conditions.
 Not all psychopathology that occurs in individuals
 exposed to an extreme stressor should necessarily be attributed to PTSD. The PTSD diagnosis
 requires that trauma exposure precede the onset or exacerbation of pertinent symptoms. If the
 symptom response pattern to the extreme stressor meets criteria for another mental disorder,
 these diagnoses should be given instead of, or in addition to, PTSD. Other diagnoses and
 conditions are excluded if they are better explained by PTSD (e.g., symptoms of panic disorder
 that occur only after exposure to traumatic reminders). If severe, symptom response patterns to
 the extreme stressor that meet criteria for another mental disorder may warrant a separate
 diagnosis (e.g., dissociative amnesia) in addition to PTSD.
 Acute stress disorder.
 Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD because the symptom
 pattern in acute stress disorder is restricted to a duration of 3 days to 1 month following exposure
 to the traumatic event.
 Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 In OCD, there are recurrent intrusive thoughts,
 but these meet the definition of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive thoughts are not related to
 an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually present, and other symptoms of PTSD
 or acute stress disorder are typically absent. Neither the arousal and dissociative symptoms of
 panic disorder nor the avoidance, irritability, and anxiety of generalized anxiety disorder are
 associated with a specific traumatic event. The symptoms of separation anxiety disorder are
 clearly related to separation from home or family, rather than to a traumatic event.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Major depression may or may not be preceded by a traumatic event and
 should be diagnosed if full criteria have been met. Specifically, major depressive disorder does
 not include any PTSD Criterion B or C symptoms. Nor does it include a number of symptoms
 from PTSD Criterion D or E. However, if full criteria for PTSD are also met, both diagnoses
 may be given.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Both ADHD and PTSD may include problems in attention,
 concentration, and learning. In contrast to ADHD, where the problems in attention,
 concentration, and learning must have their onset prior to age 12, in PTSD the symptoms have
 their onset following exposure to a Criterion A traumatic event. In PTSD, disruptions in the
 individual’s attention and concentration can be attributable to alertness to danger and
 exaggerated startle responses to reminders of the trauma.
 Personality disorders.
 Interpersonal difficulties that had their onset, or were greatly exacerbated,
 after exposure to a traumatic event may be an indication of PTSD, rather than a personality
 disorder, in which such difficulties would be expected independently of any traumatic exposure.

 Dissociative disorders.
 Dissociative 
amnesia, 
dissociative 
identity 
disorder, 
and
 depersonalization-derealization disorder may or may not be preceded by exposure to a traumatic
 event or may or may not have co-occurring PTSD symptoms. When full PTSD criteria are also
 met, however, the PTSD “with dissociative symptoms” subtype should be considered.
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 Psychotic disorders.
 Traumatic brain injury.
 F43.0
 New onset of somatic symptoms
 within the context of posttraumatic distress might be an indication of PTSD rather than
 functional neurological symptom disorder.
 Flashbacks in PTSD must be distinguished from illusions, hallucinations,
 and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophrenia, brief psychotic disorder, and
 other psychotic disorders; depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features; delirium;
 substance/medication-induced disorders; and psychotic disorders due to another medical
 condition. PTSD flashbacks are distinguished from these other perceptual disturbances by being
 directly related to the traumatic experience and by occurring in the absence of other psychotic or
 substance-induced features.
 Some types of traumatic events increase risk of both PTSD and traumatic
 brain injury (TBI) because they can produce head injuries (e.g., military combat, bomb blasts,
 child physical abuse, intimate partner violence, violent crime, motor vehicle or other accidents).
 In such cases, individuals presenting with PTSD may also have TBI, and those presenting with
 TBI may also have PTSD. Individuals with PTSD who also have TBI may have persistent
 postconcussive symptoms (e.g., headaches, dizziness, sensitivity to light or sound, irritability,
 concentration deficits). However, such symptoms may also occur in non-brain-injured
 populations, including individuals with PTSD. Because symptoms of PTSD and TBI-related
 neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a differential diagnosis between PTSD and
 neurocognitive disorder symptoms attributable to TBI may be possible based on the presence of
 symptoms that are distinctive to each presentation. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are
 characteristic of PTSD and not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation and confusion are
 more specific to TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to PTSD. TBI-related memory problems
 concerning the traumatic event are typically attributable to injury-related inability to encode the
 information, whereas PTSD-related memory problems typically reflect dissociative amnesia.
 Sleep difficulties are common to both disorders.