Differential Diagnosis
 Normal grief.
 Prolonged grief disorder is distinguished from normal grief by the presence of
 severe grief reactions that persist at least 12 months (6 months in children or adolescents) after
 the death of a person who was close to the bereaved individual. It is only when severe levels of
 grief response persist for the specified duration following the death, interfere with the
 individual’s capacity to function, and exceed cultural, social, or religious norms that prolonged
 grief disorder is diagnosed. In evaluating the requirement for clinically significant symptoms to
 be present most days over the past month, it should be noted that marked increases in grief
 severity can be seen in normal grieving around calendar
327
 days that are reminders of the loss, such as the anniversary of the death, birthdays, wedding
 anniversaries, and holidays; this exacerbation of grief severity does not by itself, in the absence
 of persistent grief at other times, constitute evidence of prolonged grief disorder.
 Depressive disorders.
 Prolonged grief disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent
 depressive disorder share several symptoms, including low mood, crying, and suicidal thinking.
 However, in prolonged grief disorder the distress is focused on feelings of loss and separation
 from a loved one rather than reflecting generalized low mood. Major depressive disorder may
 also be preceded by the death of a loved one, with or without comorbid prolonged grief disorder.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Individuals who experience bereavement as a result of violent or
 accidental death may develop both PTSD and prolonged grief disorder. Both conditions can
 involve intrusive thoughts and avoidance. Whereas intrusions in PTSD revolve around the
 traumatic event (which may have caused the death of a loved one), intrusive memories in
 prolonged grief disorder focus on thoughts about many aspects of the relationship with the
 deceased, including positive aspects of the relationship and distress over the separation. Unlike
 avoidance in PTSD, which is manifested by avoidance of memories, thoughts, or feelings
 associated with the traumatic event that led to the death of the loved one (e.g., memories of the
 fatal automobile accident that killed the loved one), the avoidance in prolonged grief disorder is
 of reminders that the loved one is no longer present (e.g., avoidance of activities carried out
 together with the deceased). Moreover, reexperiencing memories in PTSD tend to be more
 perceptual, with the individual reporting that the memory feels like it is occurring in the “here
 and now,” which tends not to be the case in prolonged grief disorder. In prolonged grief disorder,
 there is also a yearning for the deceased, which is absent in PTSD.
 Separation anxiety disorder.
 Separation anxiety disorder is characterized by anxiety about
 separation from current attachment figures, whereas prolonged grief disorder involves distress
 about separation from a deceased person.
 Psychotic disorder.
 Hallucinations about the deceased (e.g., seeing the deceased in a favorite
 chair) or transient sensations about the presence of the deceased (e.g., by touch, voice, or sight)
 are common cross-culturally during normal grief, may be experienced as reassuring, and often
 occur while the individual is falling asleep (hypnagogic). To receive a diagnosis of psychotic
 disorder, individuals with prolonged grief disorder must also endorse other symptoms of
 psychosis, such as delusions, disorganized thinking, or negative symptoms.