Differential Diagnosis
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Aberrant social behaviors manifest in young children with reactive
 attachment disorder, but they also are key features of autism spectrum disorder. Specifically,
 young children with either condition can manifest dampened expression of positive emotions,
 cognitive and language delays, and impairments in social reciprocity. As a result, reactive
 attachment disorder must be differentiated from autism spectrum disorder. These
 298
 two disorders can be distinguished based on differential histories of neglect and on the presence
 of restricted interests or ritualized behaviors, specific deficit in social communication, and
 selective attachment behaviors. Children with reactive attachment disorder have experienced a
 history of severe social neglect, although it is not always possible to obtain detailed histories
 about the precise nature of their experiences, especially in initial evaluations. Children with
 autism spectrum disorder will only rarely have a history of social neglect. The restricted interests
 and repetitive behaviors characteristic of autism spectrum disorder are not a feature of reactive
 attachment disorder. These clinical features manifest as excessive adherence to rituals and
 routines; restricted, fixated interests; and unusual sensory reactions. However, it is important to
 note that children with either condition can exhibit stereotypic behaviors such as rocking or
 flapping. Children with either disorder also may exhibit a range of intellectual functioning, but
 only children with autism spectrum disorder exhibit selective impairments in social
 communicative behaviors, such as intentional communication (i.e., impairment in
 communication that is deliberate, goal-directed, and aimed at influencing the behavior of the
 recipient). Children with reactive attachment disorder show social communicative functioning
 comparable to their overall level of intellectual functioning. Finally, children with autism
 spectrum disorder regularly show attachment behavior typical for their developmental level. In
 contrast, children with reactive attachment disorder do so only rarely or inconsistently, if at all.
 Structured observations can help discriminate between the two disorders.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 Depressive disorders.
 F94.2
 Developmental delays often accompany
 reactive attachment disorder, but they should not be confused with the disorder. Children with
 intellectual developmental disorder should exhibit social and emotional skills comparable to their
 cognitive skills and do not demonstrate the profound reduction in positive affect and emotion
 regulation difficulties evident in children with reactive attachment disorder. In addition,
 developmentally delayed children who have reached a cognitive age of 7–9 months should
 demonstrate selective attachments regardless of their chronological age. In contrast, children
 with reactive attachment disorder show lack of preferred attachment despite having attained a
 developmental age of at least 9 months.
 Depression in young children is also associated with reductions in positive
 affect. There is limited evidence, however, to suggest that children with depressive disorders
 have impairments in attachment. That is, young children who have been diagnosed with
 depressive disorders still should seek and respond to comforting efforts by caregivers.
 