Differential Diagnosis
 Normative variation in sleep.
 “Normal” sleep duration varies considerably in the general
 population. “Long sleepers” (i.e., persons who require a greater than average amount of sleep) do
 not have excessive sleepiness, sleep inertia, or automatic behavior when they obtain their
 required amount of nocturnal sleep. Sleep is reported to be refreshing. If social or occupational
 demands lead to shorter nocturnal sleep, daytime symptoms may appear. In hypersomnolence
disorder, by contrast, symptoms of excessive sleepiness occur regardless of nocturnal sleep
 duration.
 An inadequate amount of nocturnal sleep, or behaviorally induced insufficient sleep
 syndrome, can produce symptoms of daytime sleepiness very similar to those of
 hypersomnolence disorder. An average sleep duration of fewer than 7 hours per night strongly
 suggests inadequate nocturnal sleep, yet in the United States, the average adult obtains only 6.75
 hours of sleep on typical weeknights. Individuals with inadequate nocturnal sleep typically
 “catch up” with longer sleep durations on days when they are free from social or occupational
 demands or on vacations. A diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder should not be made if there
 is a question regarding the adequacy of nocturnal sleep duration. A diagnostic and therapeutic
 trial of sleep extension for 10–14 days can often clarify the diagnosis.
 Narcolepsy.
 As in hypersomnolence disorder, individuals with narcolepsy have chronic
 sleepiness, but several clinical and laboratory findings help distinguish the disorders. In contrast
 to those with hypersomnolence disorder, individuals with narcolepsy tend to sleep 7–8 hours
 each day and generally feel refreshed on waking in the morning. Individuals with narcolepsy
 generally feel more alert after a 15- to 20-minute nap, whereas those with hypersomnolence
 disorder tend to take longer naps, have trouble waking from naps, and do not feel alert afterward.
 Individuals with narcolepsy also have varying amounts of cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations,
 sleep paralysis, and fragmented nocturnal sleep, whereas cataplexy never occurs in
 hypersomnolence disorder and the other symptoms are uncommon. The multiple sleep latency
 test typically shows more than two sleep-onset REM periods in narcolepsy.
 Fatigue as a symptom of another mental disorder or medical condition.
 Hypersomnolence 
disorder
 should be distinguished from tiredness related to fatigue that may be a symptom of another
 mental disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder) or medical condition (e.g., chronic fatigue
 syndrome). Unlike hypersomnolence, tiredness is not necessarily relieved by increased sleep and
 is unrelated to sleep quantity or quality.
 421
 Breathing-related sleep disorders.
 Chronic sleepiness is common in breathing-related sleep
 disorders. Individuals with hypersomnolence and breathing-related sleep disorders may have
 similar patterns of excessive sleepiness. Breathing-related sleep disorders are suggested by a
 history of loud snoring, pauses in breathing during sleep, and nonrefreshing sleep. Examination
 often reveals obesity, a small airway, and large neck diameter. Hypertension is common, and
 some individuals may demonstrate signs of heart failure. Polysomnographic studies can confirm
 the presence of apneic events in breathing-related sleep disorder (and their absence in
 hypersomnolence disorder).
 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
 In contrast to individuals with hypersomnolence disorder,
 individuals with specific subtypes of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder show specific
 temporal patterns of symptoms. For example, individuals with delayed sleep phase type often
 have sleep inertia and sleepiness in the morning and feel most alert in the evening and night, with
 habitually late bedtimes. In contrast, those with advanced sleep phase type become sleepy and go
 to bed early in the evening but are alert and wake easily in the early morning.
 Parasomnias.
 Parasomnias such as non–REM sleep arousal disorders (sleepwalking/sleep terrors)
Hypersomnolence in other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 or REM sleep behavior disorder rarely produce the prolonged, undisturbed nocturnal sleep or
 daytime sleepiness characteristic of hypersomnolence disorder. However, parasomnias such as
 nightmare disorder, which may result in significant curtailment of total sleep time, may
 conceivably manifest with daytime sleepiness.
 Hypersomnolence disorder must
 be distinguished from hypersomnolence occurring as a symptom of another mental disorder (e.g.,
 major depressive episode, especially episodes with atypical features) or medical condition (e.g.,
 certain cancers, multiple sclerosis). If the predominant complaint of excessive sleepiness is
 adequately explained by another mental disorder or medical condition, then an additional
 diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is not warranted. However, if the hypersomnolence is not
 adequately explained by a comorbid mental disorder or medical condition (e.g., the severity and
 nature of the hypersomnolence far exceed what would be expected with the mental disorder or
 medical condition), an additional diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is warranted.
 