Differential Diagnosis
 Normal sleep variations.
 Normal sleep duration varies considerably across persons. Some
 individuals who require little sleep (“short sleepers”) may be concerned about their sleep
 duration. Short sleepers differ from individuals with insomnia disorder by the lack of difficulty
 falling or staying asleep and by the absence of characteristic daytime symptoms (e.g., fatigue,
 concentration problems, irritability). However, some short sleepers may desire or attempt to
 sleep for a longer period of time and, by prolonging time in bed, may create an insomnia-like
 sleep pattern. Clinical insomnia also should be distinguished from normal, age-related sleep
 changes. Insomnia must also be distinguished from sleep deprivation attributable to inadequate
 opportunity or circumstance for sleep resulting, for example, from an emergency or from
 professional or family obligations forcing the individual to stay awake.
 Situational/acute insomnia.
 Situational/acute insomnia is a condition lasting a few days to several
 weeks, often associated with acute stress due to life events or with changes in
 416
 sleep schedules. These acute or short-term insomnia symptoms may also produce significant
 distress and interfere with social, personal, and occupational functioning. When such symptoms
 are frequent enough and meet all other criteria except for the 3-month duration, a diagnosis of
 other specified insomnia disorder or unspecified insomnia disorder is made. While the disorder
 often remits with subsidence of the stress or adjustment to the change in sleep schedule, some
 individuals will develop maladaptive patterns of thought and behavior that result in the
 development of a chronic insomnia disorder.
Delayed sleep phase and shift work types of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder.
 Individuals with the
 delayed sleep phase type of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder report sleep-onset insomnia
 only when they try to sleep at socially normal times, but they do not report difficulty falling
 asleep or staying asleep when their bed and rising times are delayed and coincide with their
 endogenous circadian rhythm. This pattern is observed particularly among adolescents and
 younger adults. Shift work type differs from insomnia disorder by the history of recent shift
 work.
 Restless legs syndrome.
 Restless legs syndrome often produces difficulties initiating and
 maintaining sleep. However, an urge to move the legs and any accompanying unpleasant leg
 sensations are features that differentiate this disorder from insomnia disorder.
 Breathing-related sleep disorders.
 Most individuals with a breathing-related sleep disorder have a
 history of loud snoring, breathing pauses during sleep, and excessive daytime sleepiness.
 Nonetheless, as many as 50% of individuals with sleep apnea may also report insomnia
 symptoms, a feature that is more common among women and older adults.
 Narcolepsy.
 Narcolepsy may cause insomnia complaints but is distinguished from insomnia
 disorder by the predominance of symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, sleep
 paralysis, and sleep-related hallucinations.
 Parasomnias.
 Parasomnias are characterized by a complaint of unusual behavior or events during
 sleep that may lead to intermittent awakenings and difficulty resuming sleep. However, it is these
 behavioral events, rather than the insomnia per se, that dominate the clinical picture.
 Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type.
 Substance/medication-induced 
sleep
 disorder, insomnia type, is distinguished from insomnia disorder by the fact that a substance (i.e.,
 a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the
 insomnia (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder” later in this chapter). For
 example, insomnia occurring only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be
 diagnosed as caffeine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type, with onset during intoxication

 