Differential Diagnosis
 Other hypersomnias.
 Hypersomnolence disorder (also known as idiopathic hypersomnia) and
 narcolepsy are similar with respect to the presence of chronic daytime sleepiness, age at onset
 (typically adolescence or early adulthood), and stable course over time, but can be distinguished
 based on distinctive clinical and laboratory features. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder
 typically have longer and less disrupted nocturnal sleep, greater difficulty awakening, more
 persistent daytime sleepiness (as opposed to more discrete “sleep attacks” in narcolepsy), longer
 and less refreshing daytime sleep episodes, and little or no dreaming during daytime naps. By
 contrast, individuals with NT1 generally have cataplexy. Those with NT1 or NT2 may
 demonstrate recurrent intrusions of elements of REM sleep into the transition between sleep and
 wakefulness (e.g., sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis). The MSLT typically
 demonstrates shorter sleep latencies (i.e., greater physiological sleepiness) as well as the
 presence of multiple SOREMPs in individuals with narcolepsy.
 Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep.
 Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep
 are common in adolescents and shift workers. In adolescents, difficulties falling asleep at night
 are common, causing sleep deprivation. The MSLT result may be falsely positive if conducted
 while the individual is sleep deprived or while his or her sleep is phase delayed.
 Sleep apnea syndromes.
 Obstructive sleep apnea is common in the general population and can be
 present in individuals with narcolepsy due to obesity. Because obstructive sleep apnea is more
 frequent than narcolepsy, cataplexy may be overlooked (or absent). Narcolepsy should be
 considered in individuals with persistent sleepiness despite treatment of their sleep apnea.
 Insomnia disorder.
 Individuals with narcolepsy may focus on the presence of nocturnal sleep
 disruption and incorrectly attribute daytime sleepiness to insomnia disorder. Although
 individuals with narcolepsy, like those with insomnia disorder, may experience frequent
 awakenings during the night, individuals with narcolepsy typically have no difficulty initiating
 sleep or returning to sleep in contrast to those with insomnia disorder.
 428
 Moreover, insomnia disorder is not typically associated with the severity of daytime sleepiness
 observed in narcolepsy.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Excessive daytime sleepiness is a common complaint of both
individuals with major depression and individuals with narcolepsy. The presence of cataplexy
 (which is not a feature of major depressive disorder) along with the severity of excessive daytime
 sleepiness indicates a diagnosis of NT1 rather than major depressive disorder. Moreover, in
 individuals with major depression, MSLT results are most often normal, and there is dissociation
 between subjective and objective sleepiness, as measured by the mean sleep latency during the
 MSLT. In a meta-analysis of individuals with psychiatric disorders evaluated for sleepiness,
 while 25% had a mean sleep latency of < 8 minutes on the MSLT, only rarely were two or more
 SOREMPs noted on the MSLT, highlighting the more specific REM sleep dysfunction of
 narcolepsy.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder; pseudocataplexy).
 Individuals 
with
 functional neurological symptom disorder can present with weakness that may raise questions of
 cataplexy. However, in functional neurological symptom disorder, the weakness is often long
lasting, has unusual triggers, and can result in frequent falls. Individuals may report sleeping and
 dreaming during MSLT naps, yet the MSLT does not show the characteristic SOREMP. Home
 video recordings and video during sleep studies can be helpful to distinguish this condition from
 true cataplexy. The weakness is usually generalized in pseudocataplexy, without partial attacks.
 Full-blown, long-lasting pseudocataplexy may occur during consultation, allowing the
 examining physician enough time to verify reflexes, which remain intact.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or other behavioral problems.
 In children and adolescents,
 sleepiness can cause behavioral problems, including aggressiveness and inattention, leading to a
 misdiagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
 Atonic seizures.
 Atonic seizures, a type of seizure that causes sudden loss of muscle strength,
 must be distinguished from cataplexy. Atonic seizures are not commonly triggered by emotions
 and tend to manifest as abrupt falls rather than the slower “melting” quality of cataplexy. Atonic
 seizures usually occur in individuals with additional seizure types and have distinct signatures on
 the electroencephalogram.
 Syncope.
 Chorea and motor disorders.
 Like syncope, cataplexy usually develops over several seconds, but individuals with
 cataplexy do not have presyncopal symptoms of dizziness, tunnel vision, and auditory changes.
 In young children, cataplexy can be misdiagnosed as chorea or
 pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections
 (PANDAS), especially in the context of a strep throat infection and high antistreptolysin O
 antibody levels. Some children may have an overlapping motor disorder close to onset of the
 cataplexy.
 Schizophrenia.
 In the presence of florid and vivid hypnagogic hallucinations, individuals with
 narcolepsy may think these experiences are real—a feature that suggests the presence of a true
 hallucination characteristic of schizophrenia. However, clear differences have been described in
 the pattern of hallucinatory experiences in narcolepsy compared with schizophrenia. Individuals
 with narcolepsy tend to report sleep-related multisensory “holistic” hallucinations (visual,
 auditory, tactile) rather than the predominantly verbal-auditory sensory mode of individuals with
 schizophrenia. Moreover, high-dose stimulant treatment of individuals with narcolepsy may
 result in the development of persecutory delusions. If cataplexy is present with hallucinations or
 delusions, the first clinical supposition would be that these symptoms are secondary to
 narcolepsy before consideration of a co-occurring diagnosis of schizophrenia.

 