Differential Diagnosis
 Sleep terror disorder.
 Both nightmare disorder and sleep terror disorder include awakenings or
 partial awakenings with fearfulness and autonomic activation, but the two disorders can be
 readily differentiated. Nightmares typically occur later in the night, during REM sleep, and
 produce vivid, story-like, and clearly recalled dreams; mild autonomic arousal; and complete
 awakenings. Sleep terrors typically arise in the first third of the night during deep NREM sleep
 (especially during stage 3 sleep, now called N3 sleep) and produce either no dream recall or
 images without an elaborate story-like quality. Sleep terrors are thought to be caused by partial
 awakenings intermixed with persisting sleep, with clinical manifestations of confusion,
 disorientation, and only partial responsiveness, and often with substantial autonomic arousal.
 There is usually amnesia for the event in the morning.
 REM sleep behavior disorder.
 The presence of complex vocal and motor activity during frightening
 dreams should prompt further evaluation for REM sleep behavior disorder, which occurs more
 typically among late middle- and older-age men but may also affect women. Although
 nightmares are typically characteristic of REM sleep behavior disorder, unlike nightmare
 disorder, REM sleep behavior disorder is associated with dream enactment that may cause
 nocturnal injuries. If the nightmares precede REM sleep behavior disorder and warrant
 independent clinical attention, an additional diagnosis of nightmare disorder may be given.
 Bereavement.
 Dysphoric dreams may occur during bereavement but typically involve loss and
 sadness and are followed by self-reflection and insight, rather than distress, on awakening.
PTSD or acute stress disorder.
 Nightmares in which the content or affect of the dream is related to
 a traumatic event may be a component of PTSD or acute stress disorder. An additional diagnosis
 of nightmare disorder may be warranted if the severity or frequency of the nightmares
 necessitates independent clinical attention.
 Narcolepsy.
 Sleep-related seizures.
 Nightmares are a frequent complaint in narcolepsy, but the presence of excessive
 sleepiness, with or without cataplexy, differentiates this condition from nightmare disorder.
 Nocturnal seizures usually involve stereotyped motor activity. Associated
 nightmares, if recalled, are often also repetitively stereotyped in nature or reflect epileptogenic
 features such as the content of diurnal auras, phosphenes (visual sensations in the absence of
 light input), or ictal imagery.
 Breathing-related sleep disorders.
 Panic disorder.
 Breathing-related sleep disorders can lead to awakenings with
 autonomic arousal, but these are not usually accompanied by recall of nightmares.
 Panic attacks arising during sleep can produce abrupt awakenings with autonomic
 arousal and fearfulness, but nightmares are typically not reported and symptoms are similar to
 panic attacks arising during wakefulness.
 Sleep-related dissociative disorders.
 Substance or medication use.
 Individuals may recall actual physical or emotional trauma as
 a “dream” during electroencephalography-documented awakenings.
 Numerous substances/medications can precipitate nightmares,
 including dopaminergic drugs; β-adrenergic antagonists and other antihypertensives;
 amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other stimulants; antidepressants; smoking cessation
 aids; and melatonin. Withdrawal of REM sleep–suppressant medications
 461
 (e.g., antidepressants) and alcohol can produce REM sleep rebound accompanied by nightmares.
 If nightmares are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of
 substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be considered.