Differential Diagnosis
 Nightmare disorder.
 In contrast to individuals with NREM sleep arousal disorders, individuals
 with nightmare disorder typically awaken easily and completely, report vivid storylike dreams
 accompanying the episodes, and tend to have episodes later in the night. NREM sleep arousal
 disorders occur during NREM sleep, whereas nightmares usually occur during REM sleep.
 Parents of children with NREM sleep arousal disorders may misinterpret reports of fragmentary
 imagery as nightmares.
 456
 Breathing-related sleep disorders.
 Breathing disorders during sleep can also produce confusional
 arousals with subsequent amnesia. However, breathing-related sleep disorders are also
 characterized by symptoms of snoring, breathing pauses, and daytime sleepiness. In some
 individuals, a breathing-related sleep disorder may precipitate episodes of sleepwalking.
 REM sleep behavior disorder.
 REM sleep behavior disorder may be difficult to distinguish from
 NREM sleep arousal disorders. REM sleep behavior disorder is characterized by episodes of
 prominent, complex movements, often involving personal injury arising from sleep. In contrast
 to NREM sleep arousal disorders, REM sleep behavior disorder occurs during REM sleep.
 Individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder may be awakened easily during an episode and
 report more detailed and vivid dream content than do individuals with NREM sleep arousal
 disorders. These individuals and/or their bed partners often report that they “act out dreams.”
 Parasomnia overlap syndrome.
 Sleep-related seizures.
 Parasomnia overlap syndrome consists of clinical and
 polysomnographic features of both sleepwalking and REM sleep behavior disorder.
 Some types of seizures can produce episodes of very unusual behaviors
 that occur predominantly or exclusively during sleep. Nocturnal seizures may closely mimic
 NREM sleep arousal disorders but tend to be more stereotypic in nature, occur multiple times
 nightly, and be more likely to occur from daytime naps. In addition, seizures may arise from
 wakefulness, which does not occur with NREM sleep arousal disorders. The presence of sleep
related seizures does not preclude the presence of NREM sleep arousal disorders. When
 recurrent, sleep-related seizures are considered to be a form of epilepsy.
 Alcohol-induced blackouts.
 Alcohol-induced blackouts may be associated with extremely complex
 behaviors in the absence of other suggestions of intoxication. They do not involve the loss of
 consciousness but rather reflect an isolated disruption of memory for events during a drinking
 episode. By history, these behaviors may be indistinguishable from those seen in NREM sleep
arousal disorders.
 Dissociative amnesia, with dissociative fugue.
 Dissociative fugue may be extremely difficult to
 distinguish from sleepwalking. Unlike all other parasomnias, nocturnal dissociative fugue arises
 from a period of wakefulness during sleep, rather than precipitously from sleep without
 intervening wakefulness. A history of recurrent childhood physical or sexual abuse is usually
 present (but may be difficult to obtain).
 Malingering or other voluntary behavior.
 Panic disorder.
 Medication-induced complex behaviors.
 As with dissociative fugue, malingering or other voluntary
 behavior occurs during wakefulness.
 Panic attacks may also cause abrupt awakenings from deep NREM sleep
 accompanied by fearfulness, but these episodes produce rapid and complete awakening without
 the confusion, amnesia, or motor activity typical of NREM sleep arousal disorders.
 Behaviors similar to those in NREM sleep arousal disorders
 can be induced by use of, or withdrawal from, substances or medications (e.g., benzodiazepines,
 nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotics, opiates, cocaine, nicotine, antipsychotics or other
 dopamine receptor–blocking agents, tricyclic antidepressants, chloral hydrate). Such behaviors
 may arise from the sleep period and may be extremely complex. The underlying pathophysiology
 appears to be a relatively isolated amnesia. In such cases, substance/medication-induced sleep
 disorder, parasomnia type, should be diagnosed (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep
 Disorder” later in this chapter).
 Night eating syndrome.
 In contrast to the sleep-related eating form of sleepwalking, which is
 characterized by recurrent episodes of eating during incomplete arousals from sleep, night eating
 syndrome is considered to be an abnormality in the circadian rhythm of meal timing, with a
 normal circadian timing of sleep onset in which the individual wakes up in the middle of the
 night and overeats.

