Differential Diagnosis
 Other parasomnias.
 Confusional arousals, sleepwalking, and sleep terrors can easily be confused
 with REM sleep behavior disorder. In general, these disorders occur in individuals younger than
 50 years. Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, they arise from NREM sleep and therefore tend
 to occur in the early portion of the sleep period. Awakening from a confusional arousal is
 associated with confusion, disorientation, and incomplete recall of dream mentation
 accompanying the behavior. Polysomnographic monitoring in the disorders of arousal generally
 reveals normal REM sleep atonia unless there is a comorbid parasomnia.
Medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type.
 Many widely prescribed medications, including
 tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and serotonin-norepinephrine
 reuptake inhibitors, may result in polysomnographic evidence of REM sleep without atonia and
 in frank REM sleep behavior disorder, which is diagnosed as a medication-induced sleep
 disorder, parasomnia type. It is not known whether the medications per se result in REM sleep
 without atonia and/or REM sleep behavior disorder, or whether they unmask an underlying
 predisposition.
 Asymptomatic REM sleep without atonia.
 Clinical dream-enacting behaviors coupled with the
 polysomnographic finding of REM sleep without atonia is necessary for the diagnosis of REM
 sleep behavior disorder. REM sleep without atonia without a clinical history of dream-enacting
 behaviors is simply an asymptomatic polysomnographic observation with an as yet unknown
 clinical significance.
 464
 Nocturnal seizures.
 Nocturnal seizures may mimic REM sleep behavior disorder, but the
 behaviors characteristic of nocturnal seizures are generally stereotyped. Polysomnographic
 monitoring employing a full electroencephalographic seizure montage may differentiate the two.
 REM sleep without atonia is generally not present on polysomnographic monitoring in
 individuals with epilepsy.
 Obstructive sleep apnea.
 Obstructive sleep apnea may result in vocalizations and motor behaviors
 that very closely resemble REM sleep behavior disorder, such as talking, shouting, gesturing,
 and punching, along with unpleasant dreams. Polysomnographic monitoring is necessary to
 differentiate between these two disorders. In REM sleep behavior disorder, the parasomnia
 symptoms occur during periods of REM sleep without atonia. In obstructive sleep apnea, the
 parasomnia symptoms only occur during arousals at the end of the obstructive sleep apneic
 events and resolve following effective treatment of the obstructive sleep apnea (continuous
 positive airway pressure). REM sleep without atonia is not typically observed in obstructive
 sleep apnea.
 Other specified dissociative disorder (sleep-related psychogenic dissociative disorder).
 Unlike virtually
 all other parasomnias, which arise precipitously from NREM or REM sleep, psychogenic
 dissociative behaviors arise from a period of well-defined wakefulness during the sleep period.
 Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, this condition is more prevalent in young women.
 Malingering.
 Many cases of malingering in which the individual reports problematic sleep
 movements mimic the clinical features of REM sleep behavior disorder, and polysomnographic
 documentation is mandatory. 