Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Sleep disturbances are commonly encountered in
 the context of substance intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of
 substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be made instead of a
 474
 diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the sleep disturbance is
 predominant in the clinical picture and is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
 attention.
 Delirium.
 If the substance/medication-induced sleep disturbance occurs exclusively during the
 course of a delirium, it is not diagnosed separately.
 Other sleep disorders.
 A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is distinguished from
 another sleep disorder if a substance/medication is judged to be etiologically related to the
 symptoms. A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder attributed to a prescribed medication
 for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its onset while the individual is receiving
 the medication or during discontinuation, if there is a discontinuation/withdrawal syndrome
 associated with the medication. Once treatment is discontinued, the sleep disturbance will
 usually remit within days to several weeks. If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes for
 the sleep disturbance–related symptoms should be considered. Not infrequently, individuals with
 another sleep disorder use medications or drugs of abuse to self-medicate their symptoms (e.g.,
 alcohol for management of insomnia). If the substance/medication is judged to play a significant
 role in the exacerbation of the sleep disturbance, an additional diagnosis of a
 substance/medication-induced sleep disorder may be warranted.
 Sleep disorder associated with medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder and
 sleep disorders with a medical condition (i.e., insomnia disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, and
 nightmare disorder) may produce similar symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, or
 nightmares, respectively. Many medical conditions that cause sleep disturbance are treated with
 medications that may also cause sleep disturbances. The chronology of symptoms is the most
 important factor in distinguishing between these two sources of sleep symptoms. Difficulties
 with sleep in an individual with a comorbid medical condition that clearly preceded the use of
 any medication for treatment of that medical condition would suggest a diagnosis of insomnia
 disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, or nightmare disorder with the specifier “with [specific
 medical condition]” applicable to the diagnosis. Conversely, sleep symptoms that appear only
after the initiation of a particular substance/medication suggest a substance/medication-induced
 sleep disorder. If the sleep disturbance is comorbid with another medical condition and is also
 exacerbated by substance use, both diagnoses are given (i.e., insomnia disorder,
 hypersomnolence disorder, or nightmare disorder, “with [specific medical condition]”
 respectively; and [specific substance/medication]-induced sleep disorder). When there is
 insufficient evidence to determine whether the sleep disturbance is attributable to a
 substance/medication or a medical condition, or independent (i.e., not attributable to either a
 substance/medication or a medical condition), a diagnosis of unspecified sleep-wake disorder is
 indicated.
 