Differential Diagnosis
 Normal development.
 Simple stereotypic movements are common in infancy and early childhood.
 Rocking may occur in the transition from sleep to awake, a behavior that usually resolves with
 age. Complex stereotypies are less common in typically developing children and can usually be
 suppressed by distraction or sensory stimulation. The individual’s daily routine is rarely affected,
and the movements generally do not cause the child distress. The diagnosis would not be
 appropriate in these circumstances.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Stereotypic movements may be a presenting symptom of autism
 spectrum disorder and should be considered when repetitive movements and behaviors are being
 evaluated. Deficits of social communication and reciprocity manifesting in autism spectrum
 disorder are generally absent in stereotypic movement disorder, and thus social interaction, social
 communication, and rigid repetitive behaviors and interests are distinguishing features. When
 autism spectrum disorder is present, stereotypic movement disorder is diagnosed only when there
 is self-injury or when the stereotypic behaviors are sufficiently severe to become a focus of
 treatment.
 Tic disorders.
 Typically, stereotypies have an earlier age at onset (before 3 years) than do tics,
 which have a mean age at onset of 4–6 years. They also are consistent and fixed in their pattern
 or topography compared with tics, which are variable in their presentation,
 92
 typically changing in character over time. Stereotypies may involve arms, hands, or the entire
 body, while tics commonly involve eyes, face, head, and shoulders. Stereotypies are more fixed,
 rhythmic, and prolonged in duration than tics, which, generally, are brief, rapid, random, and
 fluctuating. Stereotypies are ego-syntonic (children enjoy them) as opposed to tics, which are
 usually ego-dystonic. Tics wax and wane in location and time and are uniquely associated with
 premonitory urge (a physical feeling that precedes many tic movements). Tics and stereotypic
 movements are both reduced by distraction.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Stereotypic movement disorder is distinguished from
 obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) by the absence of obsessions, as well as by the nature of
 the repetitive behaviors. In OCD the individual feels driven to perform repetitive behaviors in
 response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly, whereas in
 stereotypic movement disorder the behaviors are seemingly driven but apparently purposeless.
 Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder are characterized
 by body-focused repetitive behaviors (i.e., hair pulling and skin picking) that may be seemingly
 driven but that are not apparently purposeless, and that may not be patterned or rhythmical.
 Furthermore, onset in trichotillomania and excoriation disorder is not typically in the early
 developmental period, but rather around puberty or later.
 Other neurological and medical conditions.
 The diagnosis of stereotypic movements requires the
 exclusion of habits, mannerisms, paroxysmal dyskinesias, and benign hereditary chorea. A
 neurological history and examination are required to assess features suggestive of other
 disorders, such as myoclonus, dystonia, tics, and chorea. Involuntary movements associated with
 a neurological condition may be distinguished by their signs and symptoms. For example,
 repetitive, stereotypic movements in tardive dyskinesia can be distinguished by a history of
 chronic neuroleptic use and characteristic oral or facial dyskinesia or irregular trunk or limb
 movements. These types of movements do not result in self-injury. Stereotypies are a common
 manifestation of a variety of neurogenetic disorders, such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Rett
 syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and Smith-Magenis syndrome. For
 stereotypic movement disorder that is associated with a known genetic or other medical
Substance-induced repetitive behaviors.
 Functional (conversion) stereotypies.
 F95.2
 F95.1
 condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic movement
 disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereotypic movement
 disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
 A diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
 appropriate for repetitive skin picking or scratching associated with amphetamine intoxication or
 abuse. In such cases, the diagnosis substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and
 related disorder would apply.
 Stereotyped movements must be distinguished from
 functional (conversion) movements. Sudden onset, distractibility, changing pattern with
 unexplained improvement or aggravation, and the coexistence of other symptoms of functional
 neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder) are some of the typical features that help
 identify functional stereotypies.