Differential Diagnosis
 Abnormal movements that may accompany other medical conditions, including other
 movement disorders.
 Motor stereotypies are defined as involuntary rhythmic, repetitive, predictable movements that
 appear purposeful but serve no obvious adaptive function. They are often self-soothing or
 pleasurable and stop with distraction. Examples include repetitive hand waving/rotating, arm
 flapping, and finger wiggling. Motor stereotypies can usually be differentiated from tics based on
 the former’s earlier age at onset (often younger than 3 years), prolonged duration (seconds to
 minutes), being repetitive and rhythmic in form and location, lacking a premonitory sensation or
 urge, and cessation with distraction (e.g., hearing name called or being touched). Chorea
 represents rapid, random, continual, abrupt, irregular, unpredictable, nonstereotyped actions that
 are usually bilateral and affect all parts of the body (i.e., face, trunk, and limbs). The timing,
 direction, and distribution of movements vary from moment to moment, and movements usually
 worsen during attempted voluntary action. Dystonia is the simultaneous sustained contraction of
 both agonist and antagonist muscles, resulting in a distorted posture or movement of parts of the
 body. Dystonic postures are often triggered by attempts at voluntary movements and are not seen
 during sleep.
 Paroxysmal dyskinesias.
 Paroxysmal dyskinesias are characterized by episodic involuntary
dystonic or choreoathetoid movements that are precipitated by voluntary movement or exertion
 and less commonly arise from normal background activity.
 Myoclonus.
 Myoclonus is characterized by a sudden unidirectional movement that is often
 nonrhythmic. It may be worsened by movement and occur during sleep. Myoclonus is
 differentiated from tics by its rapidity, lack of suppressibility, and absence of a premonitory
 sensation or urge.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Differentiating compulsions in OCD from complex
 tics may be difficult, especially because they frequently co-occur in the same individual. The
 compulsions of OCD are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress and are usually
 performed in response to an obsession (e.g., fear of contamination). In contrast, many individuals
 with a tic disorder feel the need to perform the action in a particular fashion, equally on both
 sides of the body a certain number of times or until a “just right” feeling is achieved. Body
focused repetitive behavior disorders (i.e., persistent hair-pulling, skin-picking, nail-biting) are
 more goal-directed and complex than tics.
 Functional tic disorder.
 Functional disorders should also be considered when an individual
 presents with “tic attacks” that can go on for extended periods of time lasting from 15 minutes to
 several hours.
