Differential Diagnosis
 Nonpathological use of alcohol.
 The key element of alcohol use disorder is the use of heavy doses
 of alcohol with resulting repeated and significant distress or impaired functioning. While most
 drinkers sometimes consume enough alcohol to feel intoxicated, only a minority (< 20%) ever
 develop alcohol use disorder. Therefore, drinking, even daily, in low doses and occasional
 intoxication do not by themselves make this diagnosis.
 Alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol-induced mental disorders.
 Alcohol use disorder is
 differentiated from alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol induced mental
 disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced depressive disorder) in that alcohol use disorder describes a
 problematic pattern of alcohol use that involves impaired control over alcohol use, social
 impairment due to alcohol use, risky alcohol use (e.g., driving while intoxicated), and
 pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas alcohol
 intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that develop in the context of heavy use. Alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal,
 and alcohol-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with alcohol use disorder.
 In such cases, a diagnosis of alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or an alcohol-induced
 mental disorder should be given in addition to
 561
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
 a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 The signs and symptoms of alcohol use disorder are
 similar to those seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The two must be
 distinguished, however, because the course may be different, especially in relation to medical
 problems.
 Conduct disorder in childhood and antisocial personality disorder.
 Alcohol use disorder, along with
 other substance use disorders, is seen in the majority of individuals with antisocial personality
 disorder and preexisting conduct disorder. Because these diagnoses are associated with an early
 onset of alcohol use disorder as well as a worse prognosis, it is important to establish both
 conditions.