 Cannabis Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and prolonged (i.e., usually daily
 or almost daily use over a period of at least a few months).
 B. Three (or more) of the following signs and symptoms develop within
 approximately 1 week after Criterion A:
 1. Irritability, anger, or aggression.
 2. Nervousness or anxiety.
 3. Sleep difficulty (e.g., insomnia, disturbing dreams).
 4. Decreased appetite or weight loss.
 5. Restlessness.
 6. Depressed mood.
 7. At least one of the following physical symptoms causing significant
 discomfort: abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or
 headache.
 C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
 withdrawal from another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
 cannabis use disorder. If a mild cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
 code is F12.13, and if a moderate or severe cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the
 ICD-10-CM code is F12.23. For cannabis withdrawal occurring in the absence of a
 cannabis use disorder (e.g., in a patient taking cannabis solely under appropriate
 medical supervision), the ICD-10-CM code is F12.93.
 585
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of cannabis withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
 syndrome that develops after the cessation of regular cannabis use. Regular users become
 tolerant to many acute cannabis effects, and cessation of regular use can lead to a cannabis
 withdrawal syndrome. Common cannabis withdrawal symptoms include irritability, depressed
 mood, anxiety, restlessness, sleep difficulty, and decreased appetite or weight loss. Cannabis
 withdrawal can cause significant distress, leading to continued use to relieve the symptoms,
 difficulty in quitting, and relapse. Unlike withdrawal from other substances (i.e., opioids,
 alcohol, sedatives), behavioral and emotional symptoms (e.g., nervousness, irritability, sleep
 difficulty) are often more common than physical symptoms (e.g., shakiness, sweating).
 Associated Features
Cannabis withdrawal may be accompanied by observed fatigue, yawning, difficulty
 concentrating, and rebound periods of increased appetite and hypersomnia that follow initial
 periods of loss of appetite and insomnia.
 Prevalence
 Among adult and adolescent cannabis users, prevalence estimates of cannabis withdrawal
 symptoms vary widely, from 35% to 95%, based on research in the United States and other
 countries. Some of the variation in rates is likely attributable to assessment methods, and some to
 differences between samples. Among adult regular cannabis users in the general population, 12%
 reported signs and symptoms that met criteria for the full syndrome of DSM-5 cannabis
 withdrawal, with substantial differences in prevalence among non-Latinx Whites (10%), African
 Americans (15.3%), and Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders (31%).
 Among adults and adolescents who are enrolled in treatment or are heavy cannabis users, 50%
95% report cannabis withdrawal. These findings indicate that cannabis withdrawal occurs among
 a substantial subset of regular cannabis users who try to quit.
 Development and Course
 Withdrawal onset typically occurs within 24–48 hours after cessation of use. It peaks within 2–5
 days and resolves within 1–2 weeks, although sleep disturbance can persist longer. The amount,
 duration, and frequency of cannabis smoking required to produce cannabis withdrawal are
 unknown, but more chronic and frequent cannabis use is associated with greater quantity and
 severity of withdrawal symptoms. Cannabis withdrawal can occur in adults and adolescents.
 Women may experience more severe cannabis withdrawal symptoms than men.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Among cannabis users, the propensity to experience cannabis withdrawal is moderately
 heritable, indicating genetic influences. The prevalence and severity of cannabis withdrawal are
 greater among heavier cannabis users, particularly those seeking treatment for cannabis use
 disorder. Withdrawal severity may also be related to the presence and severity of comorbid
 symptoms of mental disorders.
 Functional Consequences of Cannabis Withdrawal
 Cannabis users report using cannabis to relieve withdrawal symptoms, making cannabis
 withdrawal a contributor to the persistence of cannabis use disorder. This makes cannabis
 withdrawal a current target for medication development. Worse outcomes may be
 586
 associated with greater withdrawal. Sleep difficulty has been reported as the withdrawal
 symptom most often associated with relapse to cannabis use. Cannabis users report having
 relapsed to cannabis use or initiating use of other drugs (e.g., tranquilizers) to provide relief from
 cannabis withdrawal symptoms.
Differential Diagnosis
 Because many of the symptoms of cannabis withdrawal are also symptoms of other substance
 withdrawal syndromes or of depressive or bipolar disorders, careful evaluation should focus on
 ensuring that the symptoms are not better explained by cessation of another substance (e.g.,
 tobacco or alcohol withdrawal), another mental disorder (generalized anxiety disorder, major
 depressive disorder), or another medical condition. Given the increasingly common belief that
 cannabis use is harmless, regular cannabis users experiencing cannabis withdrawal may not
 realize that their withdrawal symptoms are due to the effects of cannabis wearing off, and
 continue to use cannabis as a form of self-medication.
 Comorbidity
 Among adult frequent cannabis users, cannabis withdrawal is associated with comorbid
 depression, anxiety, and antisocial personality disorder. Given the typical overlap of cannabis
 withdrawal with cannabis use disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Cannabis Use Disorder for
 more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.