Cannabis Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of cannabis use leading to clinically significant impairment
 or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12
month period:
 1. Cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
 intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 cannabis use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain cannabis, use
 cannabis, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis.
 5. Recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
 work, school, or home.
 6. Continued cannabis use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of cannabis.
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of cannabis use.
 8. Recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
 9. Cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by cannabis.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of cannabis to achieve
 intoxication or desired effect.
 b. Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 cannabis.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for cannabis (refer to Criteria A
 and B of the criteria set for cannabis withdrawal).
 b. Cannabis (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
 withdrawal symptoms.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met for at least 3
 months but
 576
 for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
 strong desire or urge to use cannabis,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met at
 any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
 A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis,” may be present).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to cannabis is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If a cannabis intoxication, cannabis
 withdrawal, or another cannabis-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use
the codes below for cannabis use disorder. Instead, the comorbid cannabis use
 disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the cannabis-induced disorder code (see
 the coding note for cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, or a specific
 cannabis-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid cannabis
induced anxiety disorder and cannabis use disorder, only the cannabis-induced
 anxiety disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the
 comorbid cannabis use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F12.180 for mild
 cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder or F12.280 for a
 moderate or severe cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 F12.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F12.11 Mild, In early remission
 F12.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F12.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F12.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F12.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F12.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F12.21 Severe, In early remission
 F12.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Changing severity across time in an individual may also be reflected by changes in the
 frequency (e.g., days of use per month or times used per day) and/or dose (e.g., amount used per
 episode) of cannabis, as assessed by individual self-report, report of knowledgeable others,
 clinician’s observations, and biological testing.
 Diagnostic Features
 Cannabis use disorder includes problems associated with use of substances derived from the
 cannabis plant and chemically similar synthetic compounds. In these substances, the primary
 component with psychoactive effects (and hence, addiction potential) is the cannabinoid delta-9
tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC or THC). Cannabinoids have diverse effects in the brain,
 prominent among which are actions on CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors found throughout the
 central nervous system.
 577
 Cannabis is used in many forms. It is most commonly smoked in a cigarette-like form (often
called “joints” or “reefers”), and also in pipes, water pipes (bongs or hookahs), or hollowed-out
 cigars (“blunts”). More recently developed methods include “vaping” (vaporizing) by heating
 without combustion plant cannabis material to release psychoactive components for inhalation,
 and “dabbing,” in which a concentrated cannabis product (butane hash oil, known as “dabs”),
 created through butane extraction of THC from cannabis plant material, is heated and inhaled.
 Vaping and dabbing are gaining popularity, particularly among youth. Cannabis can also be
 ingested orally in food (edibles) or beverages. Inhalation typically produces more rapid and
 intense onset of effects than oral administration. Hashish or hash oil, a concentrated extraction of
 the cannabis plant, is also used. Across products, cannabis potency (THC concentration) varies
 greatly, averaging 10%–15% in typical cannabis plant material, 30%–40% in hashish, and 50%
55% in hash oil. During the past two decades, the potency of seized illegal plant cannabis has
 steadily increased, and legal cannabis products may have even higher THC potency (e.g., 20%
 for plant material and 68% for cannabis extracts). Synthetic oral THC formulations
 (pill/capsules/sprays) are also available for various medical uses (e.g., chronic pain; nausea and
 vomiting caused by chemotherapy or ano-rexia; weight loss among those with AIDS). Other
 entirely illicit synthetic cannabinoid compounds (e.g., K2, Spice, JWH-018, JWH-073) are in the
 form of plant material sprayed with a cannabinoid formulation. Although such synthetic
 cannabinoids are designed to mimic cannabis effects, their chemical composition, potency,
 effects, and duration of action are unpredictable, and they may cause more severe adverse effects
 than cannabis plant products, including seizures, cardiac conditions, psychosis, and even death.
 In the United States, cannabis remains an illegal substance under federal law, while the legal
 status of cannabis varies by state. Thus, cannabis use under state law can involve an illicit
 product, a product authorized for medical purposes, or a completely legal product. The most
 common medical purpose for cannabis use is chronic pain, and the conditions approved for
 medicinal cannabis use vary from state to state. When cannabis or a cannabinoid is taken as
 indicated for a medical condition, tolerance and withdrawal (physiological dependence) may
 occur but should not be the primary basis for diagnosing cannabis use disorder. The efficacy of
 cannabis for different medical conditions continues to be debated, and cannabis use as medically
 advised should be taken into account when a cannabis use disorder diagnosis is being considered.
 Patterns of cannabis use can range from light, infrequent use to heavy, frequent use.
 Individuals with DSM-5 cannabis use disorder use cannabis frequently (on average, 4 or more
 days a week), and some individuals may use cannabis throughout the day over a period of
 months or years. Because of the increasingly common perception that cannabis use is harmless,
 individuals may not recognize that symptoms of cannabis use disorder (e.g., withdrawal
 symptoms) are cannabis related. Additionally, among individuals with multiple substance use
 disorders, lack of clarity about whether symptoms are caused by cannabis or by other substances
 may lead to underreporting of cannabis use disorder symptoms.
 Cannabis use disorder is defined by the same 11 criteria that define the other substance use
 disorders, as supported by considerable empirical evidence. These criteria, a cluster of behavioral
 and physical symptoms, lead to clinically significant impairment or distress and can include
 withdrawal, tolerance, craving, spending a great deal of time in activities related to the substance,
 and hazardous use (e.g., driving while under its influence). Some individuals who use cannabis
 multiple times per day do not perceive themselves as spending excessive time under the
 influence of cannabis or recovering from its effects, despite being intoxicated from cannabis or
 coming down from its effects most of the time, most days. An important marker of a severe
cannabis use disorder is continued use despite negative effects on other important activities or
 relationships (e.g., school, work, sports, partner or parent relationship).
 578
 Regular cannabis users become tolerant to many acute cannabis effects, and cessation of
 regular cannabis use generally leads to a cannabis withdrawal syndrome. Cannabis withdrawal
 can cause significant distress, leading to continued use to relieve the symptoms and difficulty
 quitting use or relapse.
 Associated Features
 Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report using it to cope with mood, insomnia, anger,
 pain, or other physiological or psychological problems, and individuals diagnosed with cannabis
 use disorder frequently have other concurrent mental disorders. Careful assessment can reveal
 that cannabis use contributes to exacerbation of these symptoms, as well as other reasons for
 frequent use (e.g., the coping motives listed above; to experience euphoria; as an enjoyable
 social activity). Chronic intake of cannabis can produce a lack of motivation that resembles
 persistent depressive disorder.
 Because some individuals may underreport the amount or frequency of their cannabis use,
 provider awareness of common signs and symptoms of cannabis use and intoxication facilitates
 better assessment of cannabis use disorder. Some additional signs of acute and chronic use are
 red eyes (conjunctival injection), cannabis odor on clothing, yellowing of fingertips (from
 smoking joints), chronic cough, burning of incense (to hide the odor), and exaggerated craving
 and impulse for specific foods, sometimes at odd times of the day or night.
 Prevalence
 Cannabinoids, especially cannabis, are the most widely used illicit psychoactive substances in
 the United States. The following prevalence data are drawn from U.S.-based studies, unless
 otherwise noted. Among youth (ages 12–17 years), the past-year prevalence of DSM-IV
 cannabis use disorder is 2.7%–3.1%. Among adults age 18 years and older, the prevalence is
 1.5%–2.9%. Among cannabis users, the prevalence of DSM-IV cannabis use disorder is 20.4%
 among youth and 30.6% among adults. For DSM-5 cannabis use disorder, 12-month prevalence
 is approximately 2.5% among adults (1.4%, 0.6%, and 0.6% at mild, moderate, and severe
 levels, respectively). During the past decade, the prevalence of cannabis use disorder has
 decreased among adolescents. In contrast, among adults, some studies suggest that the
 prevalence of cannabis use disorder has either remained stable or increased—for example,
 among adults in the general population, patients in inpatient settings, and patients in the Veterans
 Health Administration. Globally, the age-standardized rate of cannabis use disorders was 289.7
 per 100,000 people in 2016, a 25.6% increase over 1990. Prevalence varies widely across
 geographic regions, being lowest in Western Sub-Saharan Africa and highest in North America.
 According to age, the prevalence of cannabis use disorder in the United States is highest
 among individuals ages 18–29 years (6.9%) and lowest among individuals age 45 years and
 older (0.8%). Rates of cannabis use disorder are greater in men than in women (3.5% vs. 1.7%)
 and in boys than in girls ages 12–17 years (3.4% vs. 2.8%), although gender differences have
been narrowing in recent birth cohorts across several countries. Regarding ethnoracial
 differences, for adolescents ages 12–17 years, rates are highest among Hispanics (3.8%),
 followed by Whites (3.1%), African Americans (2.9%), and other ethnoracial groups (2.3%).
 Among adults, the prevalence of cannabis use disorder is 5.3% in American Indians and Alaska
 Natives, 4.5% in African Americans, 2.6% in Hispanics, 2.2% in Whites, and 1.3% in Asians
 and Pacific Islanders. In the United States and other high-income countries, the number of
 individuals seeking treatment for cannabis-related problems has increased since the 1990s.
 However, among adults with cannabis use disorder, only 7%–8% received any type of cannabis
specific treatment in the past year, indicating that cannabis use disorder is a seriously
 undertreated condition.
 579
 Development and Course
 The onset of cannabis use disorder can occur at any age but is most common during adolescence
 or young adulthood. The increasing acceptability and availability of medical and recreational
 marijuana may impact the development and course of cannabis use disorder, with increased onset
 among older adults.
 Generally, cannabis use disorder develops over an extended period of time, although the
 progression may be more rapid in adolescents, particularly in those with conduct problems. Most
 individuals who develop a cannabis use disorder establish a pattern of cannabis use that
 gradually increases in frequency and amount. Beginning around 2010, cannabis has increasingly
 displaced alcohol and tobacco in the United States as the first psychoactive substance used
 during adolescence. This may be attributable to the decrease in perceived harmfulness of
 cannabis use among adolescents and adults and the fact that many now perceive cannabis use as
 less harmful than alcohol or tobacco use.
 Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adolescents, and young adults is associated with
 preferences for novelty-seeking and risk-taking, norm-violating or other illegal behaviors, and
 conduct disorder. Milder cases of cannabis use disorder in youth primarily reflect continued use
 despite problems related to disapproval of use by peers, school administration, or family, and can
 place youths at risk for physical or behavioral consequences. In more severe cases, progression
 to using alone or using throughout the day interferes with daily functioning and takes the place of
 previously established, prosocial activities.
 Cannabis use disorder among adults typically involves well-established patterns of daily
 cannabis use that continue despite clear psychosocial or medical problems. Many adults
 experience repeated desire to stop or have failed at repeated cessation attempts. Milder adult
 cases may resemble mild adolescent cases in that cannabis use is not as frequent or heavy but
 continues despite potential significant consequences of sustained use. The rate of use among U.S.
 middle-age and older adults is increasing, which may be atributable to increased availability and
 acceptability, along with a possible “baby boomer” cohort effect resulting from high prevalence
 of use among those who were young adults in the late 1960s and the 1970s.
 Early onset of cannabis use (e.g., prior to age 15 years) is a robust predictor of the
 development of cannabis use disorder and other types of substance use disorders and mental
 disorders during young adulthood. Such early onset is often concurrent with other externalizing
problems (e.g., symptoms of conduct disorder). However, early onset is also a predictor of
 internalizing problems and as such may reflect a general risk factor for the development of
 mental disorders.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 A history of conduct disorder in childhood or adolescence and antisocial
 personality disorder are risk factors for the development of many substance use disorders,
 including cannabis use disorder. Other risk factors include externalizing or internalizing
 disorders during childhood or adolescence. Youth with high behavioral disinhibition scores show
 early-onset substance use disorders, including cannabis use disorder and multiple substance
 involvement, and early conduct problems.
 Environmental.
 Risk factors include unstable or abusive family situations, use of cannabis among
 immediate family members, a childhood history of emotional or physical abuse or the violent
 death of a close family member or friend, a family history of substance use disorders, and low
 socioeconomic status. As with all substances of abuse, the ease of availability of the substance is
 a risk factor; cannabis is relatively easy to obtain in most cultures, which increases the risk of
 developing a cannabis use disorder. Increasingly permissive U.S. state medical and recreational
 marijuana laws have reduced barriers to obtaining cannabis in about two-thirds of U.S. states.
 Living in a U.S. state that has legalized recreational
 580
 marijuana use increases the risk for adult cannabis use disorder. The risk of the disorder among
 past-year cannabis users is higher among Black, Native American, Hispanic, and Asian
 American adults and adolescents, relative to non-Hispanic Whites.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Genetic influences contribute to the development of cannabis use
 disorders. Heritable factors contribute between 30% and 80% of the total variance in risk of
 cannabis use disorders, although studies have not yet definitively identified the specific genetic
 variants involved. Genetic and environmental influences shared between cannabis and other
 types of substance use disorders suggest a general common basis for substance use disorders that
 includes cannabis use disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The acceptability of cannabis for medical and recreational use has varied widely over time and
 across cultural contexts. Currently, cannabis is one of the world’s most commonly used
 psychoactive substances. In some cultural settings, cannabis use is influenced by ethnicity,
 religion, and sociocultural practices, such as political movements.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Compared with men, women report more severe cannabis withdrawal symptoms, especially
 mood symptoms such as irritability, restlessness, and anger, and gastrointestinal symptoms such
 as stomachache and nausea, which may contribute to potential telescoping (faster transition from
 first cannabis use to cannabis use disorder).
Past-month cannabis use was reported by 7.0% of pregnant women in a nationally
 representative U.S. survey in 2016–2017. The rate of cannabis use is lower in pregnant compared
 with nonpregnant women, but resumption of use following delivery occurs in the majority who
 attain abstinence in pregnancy.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Detection of 11-nor-9-carboxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THCCOOH) in urine is often used
 as a biological marker of cannabis use. In frequent users, urine tests for THCCOOH often remain
 positive for weeks after last use, limiting the uses for these tests (e.g., remission status), and
 expertise in urine testing methods is needed to reliably interpret results. However, a positive
 result can be useful in working with individuals who deny all use despite concerns of family or
 friends. Tests for the presence of cannabinoids in blood that give more fine-grained results are
 under active development, and the development of detection using oral fluids may eventually
 offer the possibility of roadside tests to use in driving safety efforts.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 In a study of Iraq/Afghanistan-era veterans, after adjustment for multiple sociodemographic
 factors, psychiatric and other substance comorbidities, and past trauma, including combat,
 cannabis use disorder was still associated with increased risk of both suicidal and nonsuicidal
 self-injury. In a study of all U.S. Veterans Health Administration patients in 2005, any current
 substance use disorder was associated with increased suicide risk in both sexes but especially
 among women. In particular, men with cannabis use disorder had a suicide rate of 79 per
 100,000 person-years, and women with cannabis use disorder had a suicide rate of 47 per
 100,000 person-years. A review and meta-analysis of the international literature from 1990
 through 2015 found evidence that chronic cannabis use, but not acute cannabis use, is associated
 with suicidal thoughts and behavior.
 Functional Consequences of Cannabis Use Disorder
 Functional consequences of cannabis use disorder are part of the diagnostic criteria. Many areas
 of psychosocial, cognitive, and health functioning may be compromised in relation to
 581
 cannabis use disorder. Although it can be difficult to distinguish the short-term impairments due
 to cannabis intoxication from the longer-term functional consequences of cannabis use disorder,
 cognitive function (particularly higher executive function) even while unintoxicated may become
 compromised in cannabis users in a cumulative dose-dependent relationship, which may
 contribute to difficulty at school or work. Accidents due to potentially dangerous activities while
 under the influence (e.g., driving, sports, at work) are also of concern. In particular, placebo
controlled studies and large-scale epidemiological studies show that cannabis use impairs driver
 reaction time, spatial perceptions, and decision-making. Cannabis use has also been linked to a
 reduction in goal-directed activity and decreased self-efficacy, labeled an amotivational
 syndrome, that manifests itself in poor school or work performance. Similarly, cannabis
associated problems with social relationships are commonly reported in those with cannabis use
disorder. Cannabis use is associated with poorer life satisfaction and increased treatment and
 hospitalization for mental health problems.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Nonproblematic use of cannabis.
 Although the majority of individuals who use cannabis do not
 have problems related to its use, 20%–30% of cannabis users do experience symptoms and
 associated consequences consistent with a cannabis use disorder. Differentiating nonproblematic
 use of cannabis and cannabis use disorder can be challenging because individuals may not
 attribute cannabis-related social, behavioral, or psychological problems to the substance,
 especially in the context of polysubstance use. Also, failure to acknowledge heavy cannabis use
 and its role in associated problems is common among individuals referred to treatment by others
 (i.e., school, family, employer, criminal justice system).
 Cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis-induced mental disorders.
 Cannabis 
use
 disorder is differentiated from cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., cannabis-induced anxiety disorder) in that cannabis use disorder describes
 a problematic pattern of cannabis use that involves impaired control over cannabis use, social
 impairment due to cannabis use, risky cannabis use (e.g., driving while intoxicated), and
 pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas cannabis
 intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that develop in the context of heavy use. Cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal,
 and cannabis-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with cannabis use
 disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, or a cannabis
induced mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of cannabis use disorder, the
 presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Comorbidity
 Cannabis use disorder is highly comorbid with other substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol,
 cocaine, opioids). For example, compared with adults without cannabis use disorder, having a
 cannabis use disorder multiplies the risk for any other substance disorder by a factor of about
 nine. Cannabis has been commonly considered as a “gateway” drug because individuals who use
 cannabis have a substantially greater lifetime probability than nonusers of subsequently using
 other, more risky substances (e.g., opioids or cocaine). Among adults seeking treatment for a
 cannabis use disorder, many (63%) report problematic use of secondary or tertiary substances,
 including alcohol, cocaine, methamphetamine/amphetamine, and heroin or other opiates, and
 cannabis use disorder is often a secondary or tertiary problem among those with a primary
 diagnosis of other substance use disorders. Among adolescents in treatment, cannabis is
 frequently the primary substance of abuse (76%).
 582
 Among adults with DSM-5 cannabis use disorder, 64% had a past-year tobacco use disorder,
 and the odds of a comorbid tobacco disorder increased sharply as the severity of cannabis use
 disorder increased.
 Co-occurring mental disorders are also common among those with cannabis use disorder and
include major depressive disorder, bipolar I and II disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic
 stress disorder, and personality disorders. In a Minnesota twin study, about half of adolescents
 with cannabis use disorder had internalizing disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, posttraumatic
 stress disorder), and 64% had externalizing disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
 Considerable concern has been raised about cannabis use as a risk factor in schizophrenia and
 other psychotic disorders. Cannabis use in critical periods is consistently associated with a
 threefold increase in the risk for psychosis. Differences in frequency of daily cannabis use and
 use of high-potency varieties of cannabis may have contributed to the striking variation in the
 incidence of psychotic disorder across 11 European sites. The population attributable fraction
 from regular cannabis in explaining hospital admissions for psychosis was estimated to be 17.7%
 (95% CI: 1.2%–45.5%) in Chile. On the other hand, some data suggest that childhood abuse may
 be the determining factor that increases the risk for cannabis abuse and for psychosis. Overall,
 cannabis use may contribute to the onset of an acute psychotic episode, can exacerbate some
 symptoms, and can adversely affect treatment of a major psychotic illness.
 Regarding medical conditions, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome is a syndrome of nausea
 and cyclic vomiting associated with regular cannabis use that is increasingly seen in emergency
 departments as the prevalence of cannabis use increases. In addition, respiratory disorders (e.g.,
 asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pneumonia) are associated with regular cannabis
 use (by smoking, vaping, or e-cigarettes) regardless of tobacco co-use, as are some adverse
 cardiovascular outcomes.