Cannabis Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent use of cannabis.
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
 impaired motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, sensation of slowed time,
 impaired judgment, social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after,
 cannabis use.
 C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing within 2 hours of
 cannabis use:
 1. Conjunctival injection.
 2. Increased appetite.
 3. Dry mouth.
 4. Tachycardia.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: Hallucinations with intact reality testing or
 auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
 cannabis use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual disturbances.
 583
 For cannabis intoxication, without perceptual disturbances: If a mild
 cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.120, and if a
 moderate or severe cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
 F12.220. If there is no comorbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM
 code is F12.920.
 For cannabis intoxication, with perceptual disturbances: If a mild cannabis
 use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.122, and if a moderate or
 severe cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.222. If
 there is no comorbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is
 F12.922.
 Specifiers
 When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
 substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of cannabis intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
 behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, cannabis use (Criterion
 B). Intoxication typically begins with a “high” feeling followed by symptoms that include
 euphoria with inappropriate laughter and grandiosity, sedation, lethargy, impairment in short
term memory, difficulty carrying out complex mental processes, impaired judgment, distorted
 sensory perceptions, impaired motor performance, and the sensation that time is passing slowly.
 Occasionally, anxiety (which can be severe), dysphoria, or social withdrawal occurs. These
 psychoactive effects are accompanied by two or more of the following signs, developing within
 2 hours of cannabis use: conjunctival injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia
 (Criterion C).
 Intoxication develops within minutes if plant cannabis is smoked, and may take a few hours
 to develop when the cannabis is ingested orally. The effects usually last 3–4 hours, with duration
 longer when the substance is ingested orally. The magnitude of the behavioral and physiological
 changes depends on the dose, the method of administration, and the characteristics of the
 individual using the substance, such as rate of absorption, tolerance, and sensitivity to the effects
 of the substance. Because most cannabinoids, including delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9
THC), are fat soluble, the effects of cannabis or hashish may occasionally persist or reoccur for
 12–24 hours because of the slow release of psychoactive substances from fatty tissue or to
 enterohepatic circulation.
 Synthetic cannabinoids (e.g., Spice), whose use has become more common in recent years,
also produce rapid effects, including euphoria, talkativeness, feelings of joy and laughter, and
 relaxation. In terms of psychoactive effects, low doses of synthetic cannabinoids and other
 cannabis products are similar. At higher doses of synthetic cannabinoids, delusional and
 hallucinatory symptoms are more likely to occur.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of episodes of cannabis intoxication in the general population is unknown.
 However, it is probable that most individuals using cannabis would at some time experience
 symptoms that meet criteria for cannabis intoxication. Given this, the prevalence of individuals
 using cannabis and the prevalence of individuals experiencing cannabis intoxication are likely
 similar.
 Functional Consequences of Cannabis Intoxication
 Impairment from cannabis intoxication may have serious consequences, including dysfunction at
 work or school, social indiscretions, failure to fulfill role obligations, traffic accidents, and
 having unprotected sex. In rare cases, cannabis intoxication may precipitate a psychosis that may
 vary in duration.
 584
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other substance intoxication.
 Note that if the clinical presentation includes hallucinations in the absence of intact reality
 testing, a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
 Cannabis intoxication may resemble intoxication with other types of
 substances. However, in contrast to cannabis intoxication, alcohol intoxication and sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication frequently decrease appetite, increase aggressive behavior,
 and produce nystagmus or ataxia. Hallucinogens in low doses may cause a clinical picture that
 resembles cannabis intoxication. Phencyclidine, like cannabis, can be smoked and also causes
 perceptual changes, but phencyclidine intoxication is much more likely to cause ataxia and
 aggressive behavior.
 Cannabis-induced mental disorders.
 Cannabis intoxication is distinguished from cannabis-induced
 mental disorders (e.g., cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication)
 because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
 associated with cannabis intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe
 enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of cannabis intoxication with cannabis use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
 under Cannabis Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
 encountered.