Differential Diagnosis
 Opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders.
 Opioid use disorder is
 differentiated from opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders
(e.g., opioid-induced depressive disorder) in that opioid use disorder describes a problematic
 pattern of opioid use that involves impaired control over opioid use, social impairment
 attributable to opioid use, risky opioid use (e.g., continued opioid use despite medical
 complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal),
 whereas opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders describe
 psychiatric syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Opioid intoxication, opioid
 withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with opioid use
 disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or opioid-induced
 mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of opioid use disorder, the presence of
 which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Other substance intoxication.
 Alcohol intoxication and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 intoxication can cause a clinical picture that resembles that of opioid intoxication. A diagnosis of
 alcohol or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication can usually be made based on the
 absence of pupillary constriction or the lack of a response to naloxone challenge. In some cases,
 intoxication may be due both to opioids and to alcohol or other sedatives. In these cases, the
 naloxone challenge will not reverse all of the sedative effects.
 Other withdrawal disorders.
 The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid withdrawal
 resemble symptoms seen in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid withdrawal is also
 accompanied by rhinorrhea, lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which are not seen in sedative
type withdrawal. Dilated pupils are also seen in hallucinogen intoxication and stimulant
 intoxication. However, other signs or symptoms of opioid
 615
 withdrawal, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, or lacrimation,
 are not present.
 Independent mental disorders.
 Some of the effects of opioid use may resemble symptoms (e.g.,
 depressed mood) of an independent mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder).
 Opioids are less likely to produce symptoms of mental disturbance than are most other drugs of
 abuse.