Differential Diagnosis
 Pedophilia.
 Individuals with pedophilia experience recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies
 or sexual urges involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children. Unless the
 individual has acted on these sexual urges with a prepubescent child or unless the sexual urges or
 fantasies cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty, a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder is
 not warranted.
 Other paraphilic disorders.
 Sometimes individuals present with a different paraphilic disorder but
 are referred for an evaluation regarding possible pedophilic disorder (e.g., when an individual
 with a diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder exposes himself to children as well as adults). In
 some cases, both diagnoses may apply, whereas in others, it may be the case that one paraphilic
 disorder diagnosis is sufficient. For example, an individual who exposes himself exclusively to
 prepubescent children may have both exhibitionistic disorder and pedophilic disorder, whereas
 another individual who exposes himself to victims, irrespective of the victims’ age, may be
 considered to have only exhibitionistic disorder.
 Antisocial personality disorder.
 Some individuals with antisocial personality disorder sexually
 abuse children, reflecting the fact that the presence of antisocial personality disorder increases
 the likelihood that an individual who is primarily attracted to mature persons will approach a
 child sexually, on the basis of relative access to the child. An additional diagnosis of pedophilic
 disorder should only be considered if there is evidence that over a period of at least 6 months, the
 individual has also had recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors
 involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child.
 796
 Substance intoxication.
 The disinhibiting effects of substance intoxication may also increase the
 likelihood that an individual who is primarily attracted to mature persons will sexually approach
 a child.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 There are occasional individuals who complain about ego
dystonic thoughts and worries about possible attraction to children. Clinical interviewing usually
 reveals an absence of positive feelings about these thoughts, no connection between these
 thoughts and sexual behavior (e.g., masturbating to these thoughts), and sometimes additional
 ego-dystonic, intrusive sexual ideas (e.g., concerns about homosexuality).