Differential Diagnosis
 Sexual sadism.
 Individuals with sexual sadism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from
 the physical or psychological suffering of another person. Unless the sexual urges to make
 another person suffer physically or psychologically are acted on with a non-consenting person, or
 unless there is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
 or other important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder is not warranted.
 The majority of individuals who are active in community networks that practice sadistic and
 masochistic behaviors do not express any dissatisfaction with their sexual interests, and their
Infliction of physical or psychological suffering during the commission of a sex crime.
 Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
 F65.4
 behavior would not meet DSM-5 criteria for sexual sadism disorder.
 Individuals who
 commit rape or other sexual assaults might inflict pain on their victims as a result of the act of
 rape, or in the course of subduing victims or restraining them to commit the sexual assault. Such
 instrumental infliction of pain should not be considered to be indicative of sexual sadism
 disorder unless there is evidence that the individual is deriving pleasure from the infliction of
 pain and the resulting suffering of the victim (e.g., admission of specifically being aroused by the
 pain, evidence of a preference for pornography involving themes of sexual sadism, excessive use
 of pain-inducing violence that goes beyond what might be necessary in the course of committing
 the sexual assault).
 Individuals with conduct disorder and
 antisocial personality disorder may be physically cruel to people and force others to engage in
 sexual activity. Coercive or sadistic sexual behaviors that occur in the context of conduct
 disorder or antisocial personality disorder but that do not reflect an underlying pattern of sexual
 arousal from the physical or psychological suffering of another person should not be used as a
 basis for diagnosing sexual sadism disorder. In cases in which the diagnostic criteria are met for
 both sexual sadism disorder and conduct disorder/antisocial personality disorder, both disorders
 may be diagnosed.