Differential Diagnosis
 Social anxiety disorder.
 There appears to be a great deal of overlap between avoidant personality
 disorder and social anxiety disorder. It has been suggested that they may represent different
 manifestations of similar underlying problems, or avoidant personality disorder may be a more
 severe form of social anxiety disorder. However, differences have also been described, especially
 in relation to self-concept (such as self-esteem and the sense of inferiority in avoidant personality
 disorder); the latter is indirect evidence as it shows that negative self-concept in social anxiety
 disorder may be unstable and thus less pervasive and entrenched than in avoidant personality
 disorder. Additionally, studies have shown that avoidant personality disorder frequently occurs
 in the absence of social anxiety disorder, and some separate risk factors have been identified,
 providing support for retaining two separate diagnostic categories.
 Agoraphobia.
 Avoidance characterizes both avoidant personality disorder and agoraphobia, and
 they often co-occur. They can be distinguished by the motivation for the avoidance (e.g., fear of
 panic or physical harm in agoraphobia).
 Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 avoidant personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to avoidant personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Both
 avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder are characterized by feelings of
Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 F60.7
 inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance. Similar behaviors (e.g.,
 unassertiveness) and attributes (e.g., low self-esteem and low self-confidence) may be observed
 in both dependent personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder, although other
 behaviors are notably divergent, such as avoidance of social proximity in avoidant personality
 disorder but proximity-seeking in dependent personality disorder. The motivations behind
 similar behaviors may be quite different. For example, the unassertiveness in avoidant
 personality disorder is described as more closely related to fears of being rejected or humiliated,
 whereas in dependent personality disorder it is motivated by the desire to avoid being left to fend
 for oneself. However, avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder may be
 particularly likely to co-occur. Like avoidant personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder
 and schizotypal personality disorder are characterized by social isolation. However, individuals
 with avoidant personality disorder want to have relationships with others and feel their loneliness
 deeply, whereas those with schizoid or schizotypal personality disorder may be content with and
 even prefer their social isolation. Paranoid personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder
 are both characterized by a reluctance to confide in others. However, in avoidant personality
 disorder, this reluctance is attributable more to a fear of humiliation or being found inadequate
 than to a fear of others’ malicious intent.
 Many individuals display avoidant personality traits. Only when these traits are inflexible,
 maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do
 they constitute avoidant personality disorder.
 Avoidant personality disorder must be
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Avoidant personality disorder must also be distinguished from
 symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use

