Differential Diagnosis
 Separation anxiety disorder in adults.
 Adults with separation anxiety disorder are typically
 overconcerned about their offspring, spouses, parents, and pets, and experience marked
 discomfort when separated from them. In contrast, individuals with dependent personality
 disorder feel uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of being unable
 to take care of themselves.
 Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 Dependent 
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 personality 
disorder 
must 
be
 distinguished from dependency arising as a consequence of other mental disorders (e.g.,
 depressive disorders, panic disorder, agoraphobia) and as a result of other medical conditions.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 dependent personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to dependent personality disorder, all can be diagnosed.
Although many personality disorders are characterized by dependent features, dependent
 personality disorder can be distinguished by its predominantly submissive and clinging behavior
 and by the person’s self-perception of not being able to function adequately without the help and
 support of others. Both dependent personality disorder and borderline personality disorder are
 characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the individual with borderline personality
 disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional emptiness, rage, and demands,
 whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder reacts with increasing appeasement
 and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship to provide caregiving and
 support. Borderline personality disorder can further be distinguished from dependent
 771
 personality disorder by a typical pattern of unstable and intense relationships. Individuals with
 histrionic personality disorder, like those with dependent personality disorder, have a strong need
 for reassurance and approval and may appear childlike and clinging. However, unlike dependent
 personality disorder, which is characterized by self-effacing and docile behavior, histrionic
 personality disorder is characterized by gregarious flamboyance with active demands for
 attention. Moreover, individuals with histrionic personality disorder typically have less insight
 regarding their underlying dependency needs than do people with dependent personality
 disorder. Both dependent personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder are characterized
 by feelings of inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance; however,
 individuals with avoidant personality disorder have such a strong fear of humiliation and
 rejection that they withdraw until they are certain they will be accepted. In contrast, individuals
 with dependent personality disorder have a pattern of seeking and maintaining connections to
 important others, rather than avoiding and withdrawing from relationships.
 Many individuals display dependent personality traits. Only when these traits are inflexible,
 maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do
 they constitute dependent personality disorder.
 Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Dependent personality disorder must be
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 Dependent personality disorder must also be distinguished from
 symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.