Differential Diagnosis
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
 Despite the similarity in names, OCD is usually easily
 distinguished from obsessive-compulsive personality disorder by the presence of true obsessions
 and compulsions in OCD. When criteria for both obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and
 OCD are met, both diagnoses should be recorded.
 Hoarding disorder.
 A diagnosis of hoarding disorder should be considered especially when
 hoarding is extreme (e.g., accumulated stacks of worthless objects present a fire hazard and make
 it difficult for others to walk through the house). When criteria for both obsessive-compulsive
 personality disorder and hoarding disorder are met, both diagnoses should be recorded.
 Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 obsessive-compulsive personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is,
 therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their
 characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality
 775
 features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to obsessive
compulsive personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with narcissistic personality
 disorder may also profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do
Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 F07.0
 things as well, but these individuals are more likely to believe that they have achieved perfection,
 whereas those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are usually self-critical.
 Individuals with narcissistic or antisocial personality disorder lack generosity but will indulge
 themselves, whereas those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder adopt a miserly
 spending style toward both self and others. Both schizoid personality disorder and obsessive
compulsive personality disorder may be characterized by an apparent formality and social
 detachment. In obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, this stems from discomfort with
 emotions and excessive devotion to work, whereas in schizoid personality disorder there is a
 fundamental lack of capacity for intimacy.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality traits in moderation may be especially adaptive,
 particularly in situations that reward high performance. Only when these traits are inflexible,
 maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do
 they constitute obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
 must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the
 traits are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder must also be distinguished
 from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.