 Persistent Depressive Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic major
 depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.
 A. Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by
 either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.
 Note: In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at
 least 1 year.
 B. Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:
1. Poor appetite or overeating.
 2. Insomnia or hypersomnia.
 3. Low energy or fatigue.
 4. Low self-esteem.
 5. Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.
 6. Feelings of hopelessness.
 C. During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance,
 the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more
 than 2 months at a time.
 D. Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.
 E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
 F. The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder,
 schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified
 schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
 G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
 hypothyroidism).
 H. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: If criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a major depressive episode at any
 time during the 2-year period of depressed mood, then a separate diagnosis of major
 depression should be made in addition to the diagnosis of persistent depressive
 disorder along with the relevant specifier (e.g., with intermittent major depressive
 episodes, with current episode).
 Specify if:
 With anxious distress (pp. 210–211)
 With atypical features (p. 212)
 Specify if:
 In partial remission (p. 214)
 In full remission (p. 214)
 Specify if:
 Early onset: If onset is before age 21 years.
 Late onset: If onset is at age 21 years or older.
 Specify if (for most recent 2 years of persistent depressive disorder):
 With pure dysthymic syndrome: Full criteria for a major depressive episode
 have not been met in at least the preceding 2 years.
 With persistent major depressive episode: Full criteria for a major depressive
 episode have been met throughout the preceding 2-year period.
 194
With intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode: Full
 criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met, but there have been
 periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the preceding 2 years with symptoms
 below the threshold for a full major depressive episode.
 With intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode: Full
 criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met, but there has been
 one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years.
 Specify current severity:
 Mild (p. 214)
 Moderate (p. 214)
 Severe (p. 214)
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of persistent depressive disorder is a depressed mood that occurs for most
 of the day, for more days than not, for at least 2 years, or at least 1 year for children and
 adolescents (Criterion A). This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic
 major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder. Major depression may precede persistent
 depressive disorder, and major depressive episodes may occur during persistent depressive
 disorder. Individuals whose symptoms meet major depressive disorder criteria for 2 years should
 be given a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder as well as major depressive disorder.
 Individuals with persistent depressive disorder describe their mood as sad or “down in the
 dumps.” During periods of depressed mood, at least two of the six symptoms from Criterion B
 are present. Because these symptoms have become a part of the individual’s day-to-day
 experience, particularly in the case of early onset (e.g., “I’ve always been this way”), they may
 not be reported unless the individual is directly prompted. During the 2-year period (1 year for
 children or adolescents), any symptom-free intervals that have occurred have lasted no longer
 than 2 months (Criterion C).
 Prevalence
 Persistent depressive disorder is effectively an amalgam of DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and
 chronic major depressive episode. The 12-month prevalence in the United States is
 approximately 0.5% for dysthymic disorder and 1.5% for chronic major depressive disorder,
 with prevalence among women approximately 1.5 and 2 times higher than prevalence among
 men for each of these diagnoses, respectively. Based on studies using comparable ascertainment
 procedures, the lifetime and 12-month estimates of DSM-IV dysthymia may be higher in high
income than in low- and middle-income countries. However, the disorder is associated with
 elevated risk of suicidal outcomes and comparable levels of disability wherever it occurs.
 Development and Course
 Persistent depressive disorder often has an early and insidious onset (i.e., in childhood,
 adolescence, or early adult life) and, by definition, a chronic course. Borderline personality
 disorder is a particularly robust risk factor for persistent depressive disorder. When persistent
depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder coexist, the covariance of the
 corresponding features over time suggests the operation of a common mechanism. Early onset
 (i.e., before age 21 years) is associated with a higher likelihood of comorbid personality
 disorders and substance use disorders.
 When symptoms rise to the level of a major depressive episode, they are likely to
 subsequently revert to a lower level. However, depressive symptoms are much less likely to
 resolve fully in a given period of time in the context of persistent depressive disorder than they
 are in a nonchronic major depressive episode.
 195
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Factors predictive of poorer long-term outcome include higher levels of negative
 affectivity (neuroticism), greater symptom severity, poorer global functioning, and presence of
 anxiety disorders or conduct disorder.
 Environmental.
 adversity.
 Childhood risk factors include parental loss or separation and childhood
 Genetic and physiological.
 There are no clear differences in illness development, course, or family
 history between DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and chronic major depressive disorder. Earlier
 findings pertaining to either disorder are therefore likely to apply to persistent depressive
 disorder. It is thus likely that individuals with persistent depressive disorder will have a higher
 proportion of first-degree relatives with persistent depressive disorder than do individuals with
 nonchronic major depressive disorder, and more depressive disorders in general.
 A number of brain regions (e.g., prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, amygdala,
 hippocampus) have been implicated in persistent depressive disorder. Possible
 polysomnographic abnormalities exist as well.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The perceived abnormality or tolerance of chronic depressive symptoms may vary across
 cultures, affecting symptom detection and treatment acceptability. For example, some social
 groups or age cohorts may consider long-standing depressive symptoms to be normal reactions
 to adversity.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Persistent depressive disorder is associated with elevated risk of suicidal outcomes and
 comparable levels of disability, whether the disorder occurs in high-, middle-, or low-income
 countries.
 Functional Consequences of Persistent Depressive Disorder
 The degree to which persistent depressive disorder impacts social and occupational functioning
 is likely to vary widely, but effects can be as great as or greater than those of major depressive
 disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 If there is a depressed mood for more days than not plus two or more
 persistent depressive disorder Criterion B symptoms for 2 years or more, then the diagnosis of
 persistent depressive disorder is made. If the symptom criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a
 major depressive episode at any time during this period, then the additional diagnosis of major
 depression should be made. The comorbid presence of major depressive episodes during this
 period should also be noted by assigning the appropriate course specifier to the persistent
 depressive disorder diagnosis as follows: If the individual’s symptoms currently meet full criteria
 for a major depressive episode, and there have been periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the
 preceding 2 years with symptoms below the threshold for a full major depressive episode, then
 the specifier “with intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode” would be
 assigned. If full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met but there has been
 one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years, then the specifier “with
 intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode” is assigned. If a major
 depressive episode
 196
 has persisted for at least a 2-year duration and remains present, then the specifier “with persistent
 major depressive episode” is used. If the individual has not experienced an episode of major
 depression in the last 2 years, then the specifier “with pure dysthymic syndrome” is used.
 Other specified depressive disorder.
 Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include
 symptoms (i.e., markedly diminished interest or pleasure in activities; psychomotor agitation or
 retardation; recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, suicide attempt or plan) that are absent
 from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (i.e., depressed mood and two out of six
 Criterion B symptoms), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that
 have persisted longer than 2 years but that do not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder.
 If full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some point during the current
 episode of illness, a diagnosis of major depressive disorder would apply. Otherwise, a diagnosis
 of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder should be given.
 Bipolar I and bipolar II disorders.
 A history of a manic or hypomanic episode precludes the
 diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder. A history of manic episodes (with or without
 hypomanic episodes) indicates a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. A history of hypomanic episodes
 (without any history of manic episodes in individuals with persistent depressive presentations
 during which criteria have been met for a major depressive episode) warrants a diagnosis of
 bipolar II disorder. Other specified bipolar disorder applies to individuals whose presentations
 include a history of hypomanic episodes along with persistent depressive presentation that has
 never met full criteria for a major depressive episode.
 Cyclothymic disorder.
 A diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder precludes the diagnosis of persistent
 depressive disorder. Thus, if during the period lasting at least 2 years of depressed mood for most
 of the day, for more days than not, 1) there are numerous periods with hypomanic symptoms that
 do not meet criteria for a hypomanic episode, 2) there have not been any symptom-free periods
 of more than 2 months at a time, and 3) criteria have never been met for a major depressive,
 manic, or hypomanic episode, then the diag-nosis would be cyclothymic disorder instead of
Psychotic disorders.
 Depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder.
 Personality disorders.
 F32.81
 persistent depressive disorder.
 Depressive symptoms are a common associated feature of chronic psychotic
 disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder). A separate
 diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is not made if the symptoms occur only during the
 course of the psychotic disorder (including residual phases).
 Persistent depressive
 disorder must be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
 medical condition. The diagnosis is depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
 medical condition if the mood disturbance is judged, based on history, physical examination, or
 laboratory findings, to be attributable to the direct pathophysiological effects of a specific,
 usually chronic, medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis). If it is judged that the depressive
 symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition, then the
 primary mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder) is recorded, and the medical
 condition is noted as a concomitant medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus).
 A substance/medication
induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder is distinguished from persistent depressive
 disorder when a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) is judged to be
 etiologically related to the mood disturbance.
 A personality disorder is characterized by an enduring pattern of inner
 experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of the
 197
 individual’s culture, with onset by adolescence or early adulthood. Personality disorders
 commonly co-occur with persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are met for persistent
 depressive disorder and a personality disorder, both may be diagnosed.
 Comorbidity
 In comparison to individuals with major depressive disorder, those with persistent depressive
 disorder are at higher risk for psychiatric comorbidity in general, and for anxiety disorders,
 substance use disorders, and personality disorders in particular. Early-onset persistent depressive
 disorder is strongly associated with DSM-5 Cluster B and C personality disorders.