 Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
 picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
 or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive disorder that is not
 substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent depressive
 disorder could include the following:
 The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the
 cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence
 suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced
 depressive disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication
related episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
clinical attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 depressive disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
 the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a
 substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced depressive disorder, the 4th position character is “1,”
 and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance
induced depressive disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced
 depressive disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced depressive disorder, the 4th position character is “2,”
 and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe
 [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use
 disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy
 use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should
 record only the substance-induced depressive disorder.
 202
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use
 disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.14 F10.24 F10.94
 Phencyclidine F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
 Other hallucinogen F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
 Inhalant F18.14 F18.24 F18.94
 Opioid F11.14 F11.24 F11.94
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.14 F13.24 F13.94
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.14 F15.24 F15.94
 Cocaine F14.14 F14.24 F14.94
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.14 F19.24 F19.94
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
 substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.
 Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced depressive disorder begins with the specific
 substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the depressive
 symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is
 based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For
 substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other (or
 unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
 etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
 used.
 When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
 listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
 depressive disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
 during withdrawal). For example, in the case of depressive symptoms occurring during
 withdrawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine
 use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate
 diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
 depressive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
 heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.94
 phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
 substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive
 203
 mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use
 disorder with methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal;
 F19.94 dexamethasone-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is a prominent and
 persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized by
 depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
 (Criterion A) that is due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
 medication, or a toxin exposure) (Criterion B). In order to meet criteria for the diagnosis, the
 depressive symptoms must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
 withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, as evidenced by clinical
 history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B1), and the involved
 substance/medication must be capable of producing the depressive symptoms (Criterion B2). In
 addition, the depressed symptoms are not better explained by a non-substance/medication
induced depressive disorder.
 Evidence of an independent depressive disorder includes the observation that the depressive
 symptoms preceded the onset of substance/medication use, the depressive symptoms persist
 beyond a substantial period of time after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication,
or there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent non
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder (Criterion C), such as a history of recurrent
 non-substance-induced depressive episodes. This diagnosis should not be made when symptoms
 occur exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). Finally, the diagnosis requires
 that the substance/medication-induced depressive symptoms cause clinically significant distress
 or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E). The
 substance-induced depressive disorder diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of
 substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
 attention.
 The two categories of drugs of abuse most likely to cause a substance/medication-induced
 depressive disorder are depressants (e.g., intoxication with alcohol, benzodiazepines and other
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs) and stimulants (e.g., withdrawal from amphetamine-type
 substances and cocaine). Some medications (e.g., steroids; antihypertensive medications such as
 clonidine, guanethidine, methyldopoa, and reserpine; interferon; L-dopa) are especially likely to
 cause substance/medication-induced depressive syndromes. Substances implicated in
 medication-induced depressive disorder, with varying degrees of evidence, include antibiotics,
 antiviral agents (efavirenz), cardiovascular agents (beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers,
 retinoic acid derivatives (isotretinoin), antidepressants, anticonvulsants, antimigraine agents
 (triptans), antipsychotics, hormonal agents (corticosteroids, oral contraceptives, gonadotropin
releasing hormone agonists, tamoxifen), chemotherapeutic drugs, and smoking cessation agents
 (varenicline). This list is likely to grow as new compounds are synthesized.
 Clear clinical histories and careful judgment are essential in determining whether the
 substance of abuse or medication is truly associated with induced depressive symptoms or
 whether the symptoms are better understood as constituting an independent depressive disorder.
 A diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is most likely if the
 individual was taking high doses of a relevant drug of abuse or medication and there is no past
 history of independent depressive episodes. For example, a depressive episode that developed in
 the context of heavy use of a relevant substance of abuse or within the first several weeks of
 beginning alpha-methyldopa (an antihypertensive agent) in an individual with no history of
 major depressive disorder would qualify for the diagnosis of a substance- or medication-induced
 depressive disorder. In some cases, a previously established condition (e.g., major depressive
 disorder, recurrent) can recur while the individual is
 204
 coincidentally taking a drug or medication that has the capacity to cause depressive
 symptoms (e.g., alcohol and/or stimulants in context of heavy use, L-dopa, oral contraceptives).
 In all of these cases, the clinician must make a judgment as to whether the medication is
 causative in this particular situation.
 A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is distinguished from an independent
 depressive disorder by the onset or course, or by other factors associated with the substance or
 medication use. There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
 findings of use of a drug of abuse or a medication that is capable of producing depressive
 symptoms after exposure to, withdrawal from, or intoxication with that substance prior to the
onset of the depressive disorder. The neurochemical changes associated with intoxication and
 withdrawal states for some substances can be relatively protracted, and thus intense depressive
 symptoms can last for a longer period after the cessation of substance use and still be consistent
 with a diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
 Prevalence
 The lifetime rate of alcohol- and stimulant-induced depressive episodes has been reported to be
 40% or higher among individuals with relevant substance use disorders. However, in a nationally
 representative U.S. adult population, the lifetime prevalence of substance/medication-induced
 depressive disorder in the absence of a lifetime history of non-substance-induced depressive
 disorder was only 0.26%. These data indicate that special care must be taken to search for and
 address substance-induced conditions in individuals with alcohol and stimulant use disorders.
 Development and Course
 A depressive disorder associated with the use of substances (e.g., alcohol, amphetamine-type
 substances and/or cocaine, or a prescribed treatment for medical conditions) must have its onset
 while the individual is using the substance or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal
 syndrome associated with the substance. Most often, the depressive disorder has its onset within
 the first few weeks or 1 month of heavy use of the substance. Once the substance is discontinued,
 the depressive symptoms usually remit within days to several weeks, depending on the half-life
 of the substance/medication and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome. If symptoms persist 4
 weeks beyond the expected time course of withdrawal of a particular substance/medication, other
 causes for the depressive mood symptoms should be considered.
 There are several prospective controlled trials examining the association of depressive
 symptoms with use of a prescribed medication, but most reports on this topic involve
 retrospective series of individuals entering treatment, or participants in large cross-sectional
 studies. More studies exist regarding the clinical course of alcohol- and illicit drug–induced
 depressions, and most support the contention that the substance-induced conditions are very
 likely to fade away within a relatively short time after abstinence. Equally important are
 indications that individuals with significant residual depressive symptoms following treatment
 for substance use disorders have a greater likelihood of relapse into their substance use.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Risk factors for substance-induced depressive disorder include a history of antisocial personality
 disorder, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder; a history of stressful life events in the past 12
 months; a history of prior drug-induced depressions; and a family history of substance use
 disorders. In addition, neurochemical changes associated with alcohol and other drugs of abuse
 often contribute to depressive and anxiety symptoms during withdrawal that subsequently
 influence ongoing substance use and reduce the likelihood of remission of substance use
 disorders. The course of substance-induced depressive disorder may be worsened by social
structural adversity associated with poverty, racism, and marginalization.
 205
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Among individuals with a substance use disorder, the risk for developing a substance-induced
 depressive disorder appears to be similar in men and women.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory assays of the suspected substance in the blood or urine are of limited value in
 identifying substance-induced depressive disorder because blood and urine levels are often
 negative when an individual comes for evaluation, reflecting the fact that substance-induced
 depressions can last for up to 4 weeks after use of the drug of abuse or medication has ceased.
 Therefore, a positive test value only means that an individual has had recent experience with a
 substance but by itself does not establish a time course or other characteristics that are likely to
 be associated with substance-induced depressive disorder. However, as is true of most mental
 disorders, the most important data in diagnosing these conditions come from a detailed clinical
 history and the mental status examination.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 The risk of suicide attempts is higher among individuals with possible alcohol use disorder
 experiencing depressive episodes, whether substance induced or independent of substances, as
 compared with control subjects.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and withdrawal.
 Depressive symptoms occur commonly in substance
 intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of substance-induced depressive disorder
 should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal when
 the mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For
 example, dysphoric mood is a characteristic feature of cocaine withdrawal. Substance-induced
 depressive disorder with onset during withdrawal should be diagnosed instead of cocaine
 withdrawal only if the mood disturbance in Criterion A predominates in the clinical picture and
 is sufficiently severe to be a separate focus of attention and treatment.
 Independent depressive disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is
 distinguished from an independent depressive disorder by the fact that even though a substance is
 taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related to the symptoms, if the
 depressive syndrome is observed at times other than when the substance or medication is being
 used, it should be diagnosed as an independent depressive disorder.
 Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
 Because individuals with medical conditions
 often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the
 mood symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical condition rather
 than the medication, in which case depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
 diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change
 in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
 be needed to determine empirically whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician
 has ascertained that the disturbance is a function of both another medical condition and substance
 use or withdrawal, then both diagnoses (i.e., depressive disorder due to another medical
condition and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder) may be given. When there is
 insufficient evidence to determine whether the depressive symptoms are associated with
 substance (including a medication) ingestion or withdrawal or with another medical condition or
 are independent (i.e., not a function of either a substance or another medical condition), a
 diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is indicated.
 206
 Comorbidity
 In one study using DSM-IV, comparing individuals with independent major depressive disorder
 and no comorbid substance use disorder and individuals with substance/medication-induced
 depressive disorder, those with substance/medication-induced depressive disorder had higher
 rates of comorbidity with any DSM-IV mental disorder; were more likely to have specific
 disorders of tobacco use disorder, gambling disorder, and antisocial personality disorder; and
 were less likely to have persistent depressive disorder. Compared with individuals with major
 depressive disorder and a comorbid substance use disorder, individuals with
 substance/medication-induced depressive disorder are more likely to have alcohol or other
 substance use disorder; however, they are less likely to have persistent depressive disorder.