 Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
 picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
 or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
 medical condition.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g.,
 adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, in which the stressor is a serious
 medical condition).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).
 Specify if:
 F06.31 With depressive features: Full criteria are not met for a major
 depressive episode.
 F06.32 With major depressive–like episode: Full criteria are met (except
 Criterion C) for a major depressive episode.
F06.34 With mixed features: Symptoms of mania or hypomania are also
 present but do not predominate in the clinical picture.
 Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
 mental disorder (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with
 depressive features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed
 separately immediately before the depressive disorder due to the medical condition
 (e.g., E03.9 hypothyroidism; F06.31 depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism,
 with depressive features).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of depressive disorder due to another medical condition is a prominent and
 persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost
 all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture (Criterion A) and that is thought to be due
 to the physiological effects of another medical condition (Criterion B). In determining whether
 the mood disturbance is due to another medical condition, the clinician must first establish the
 presence of another medical condition. Further, the clinician must establish that the mood
 disturbance is etiologically related to another medical condition through a physiological
 207
 mechanism. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make
 this judgment. Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the
 relationship between the mood disturbance and another medical condition is etiological, several
 considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a
 temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of another medical condition
 and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of features that are
 atypical of independent depressive disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course or absence of
 family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association
 between another medical condition in question and the development of mood symptoms can
 provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation.
 Associated Features
 Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical evidence)
 is the key variable in depressive disorder due to another medical condition. The listing of the
 medical conditions that are said to be able to induce major depression is never complete, and the
 clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis.
 There are clear associations, as well as some neuroanatomical correlates, of depression with
 cerebrovascular accident (CVA), Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and traumatic brain
 injury (TBI). Among the neuroendocrine conditions most closely associated with depression are
 Cushing’s syndrome and hypothyroidism. Autoimmune disorders, such systemic lupus
 erythematosus, and deficiencies of certain vitamins, such as vitamin B12, have also been linked
 to depression. There are numerous other conditions thought to be associated with depression,
 such as multiple sclerosis. However, the literature’s support for a causal association is greater
with some conditions than with others. Currently, there is support for a direct pathophysiological
 mechanism for depressive symptoms in focal lesions (CVA, TBI, neoplasm) affecting certain
 brain regions, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome,
 and pancreatic cancer.
 Prevalence
 Sex differences in prevalence depend somewhat on the sex difference associated with the
 medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus is more common in women; stroke is
 somewhat more common in middle-age men compared with women).
 Development and Course
 Following stroke, the onset of depression appears to be acute, occurring within a few days of the
 CVA in the largest case series. However, in some cases, onset of the depression is weeks to
 months following the CVA. In the largest series, the duration of the major depressive episode
 following stroke was 9–11 months on average. With Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s
 disease, depression often precedes the major motor impairments and cognitive impairments
 associated with each condition. This is more prominently the case for Huntington’s disease, in
 which depression is considered to be the first neuropsychiatric symptom. There is some
 observational evidence that depression is less common as the neurocognitive disorder due to
 Huntington’s disease progresses. In some individuals with static brain injuries and other central
 nervous system diseases, mood symptoms may be episodic (i.e., recurring) over the course of the
 disorder. In Cushing’s syndrome and hypothyroidism, depression can be an early manifestation
 of the disease. In pancreatic cancer, depression often precedes other features.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 The risk of acute onset of a major depressive disorder following a CVA (within 1 day to a week
 of the event) appears to be strongly correlated with lesion location, with greatest risk associated
 with left frontal strokes and least risk apparently associated with right frontal lesions
 208
 in those individuals who present within days of the stroke. The association with frontal regions
 and laterality is not observed in depressive states that occur in the 2–6 months following stroke,
 perhaps indicative of later depressive symptoms representing major depressive disorder,
 adjustment disorder, or demoralization. In individuals with Parkinson’s disease, early age at
 onset, greater burden of motor symptoms, and longer duration of the disease have been
 associated with depression. Risk of depression after TBI has been associated with female gender,
 prior depressive disorder, early psychiatric symptoms following injury, lower brain volume, and
 unemployment.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Women may be at differentially higher risk for developing depression in the setting of
 cardiovascular disease, particularly poststroke.
Diagnostic Markers
 Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in
 blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated
 with manic or depressive syndromes).
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 There are no epidemiological studies that provide evidence to differentiate the risk of suicide
 from a major depressive episode due to another medical condition compared with the risk from a
 major depressive episode in general. There are case reports of suicides in association with major
 depressive episodes associated with another medical condition. There is a clear association
 between serious medical illnesses and suicide, particularly shortly after onset or diagnosis of the
 illness. Thus, it would be prudent to assume that the risk of suicide for major depressive episodes
 associated with medical conditions is not less than that for other forms of major depressive
 episode, and might even be greater.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition.
 Determination of whether a medical
 condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends on a) the absence
 of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical condition, b) the
 probability that the associated medical condition has a potential to promote or cause a depressive
 disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly after the onset or worsening of the
 medical condition, especially if the depressive symptoms remit near the time that the medical
 disorder is effectively treated or remits.
 Medication-induced depressive disorder.
 An important caveat is that some medical conditions are
 treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic
 symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is the best way to
 try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e.,
 association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).
 Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 A separate diagnosis of depressive disorder due
 to another medical condition is not given if the depressive disturbance occurs exclusively during
 the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to another medical
 condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the
 depressive disturbance is judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process
 causing the neurocognitive disorder and if symptoms of depression are a prominent part of the
 clinical presentation.
 Adjustment disorders.
 It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an adjustment
 disorder, as the onset of the medical condition is in itself a life stressor that could
 209
 bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major
 differentiating elements are the pervasiveness of the depressive picture and the number and
 quality of the depressive symptoms that the individual reports or demonstrates on the mental
Demoralization.
 status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but
 largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
 Demoralization is a common reaction to chronic medical illness. It is marked by
 a sense of subjective incompetence, helplessness, and hopelessness, and a desire to give up. It is
 often accompanied by depressive symptoms such as low mood and fatigue. Demoralization
 typically lacks the anhedonia associated with depressive disorder due to another medical
 condition, and individuals will generally find pleasure in previously meaningful activities and be
 able to experience moments of happiness.
 Comorbidity
 Conditions comorbid with depressive disorder due to another medical condition are those
 associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. It has been noted that delirium
 can occur before or along with depressive symptoms in individuals with a variety of medical
 conditions, such as Cushing’s disease. The association of anxiety symptoms, usually generalized
 symptoms, is common in depressive disorders, regardless of cause.