Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must be present in the
 final week before the onset of menses, start to improve within a few days after
 the onset of menses, and become minimal or absent in the week postmenses.
 B. One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present:
1. Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenly sad or tearful, or
 increased sensitivity to rejection).
 2. Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
 3. Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-deprecating
 thoughts.
 4. Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or on edge.
 C. One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally be present, to reach a
 total of five symptoms when combined with symptoms from Criterion B above.
 1. Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends, hobbies).
 2. Subjective difficulty in concentration.
 3. Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
 4. Marked change in appetite; overeating; or specific food cravings.
 5. Hypersomnia or insomnia.
 6. A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.
 7. Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint or muscle
 pain, a sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
 Note: The symptoms in Criteria A–C must have been met for most menstrual
 cycles that occurred in the preceding year.
 D. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or interference with work,
 school, usual social activities, or relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of
 social activities; decreased productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
 E. The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of another
 disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder, persistent
 depressive disorder, or a personality disorder (although it may co-occur with any
 of these disorders).
 F. Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings during at least two
 symptomatic cycles. (Note: The diagnosis may be made provisionally prior to
 this confirmation.)
 G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical
 condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
 198
 Recording Procedures
 If symptoms have not been confirmed by prospective daily ratings of at least two symptomatic
 cycles, “provisional” should be noted after the name of the diagnosis (i.e., “premenstrual
 dysphoric disorder, provisional”).
 Diagnostic Features
The essential features of premenstrual dysphoric disorder are the expression of mood lability,
 irritability, dysphoria, and anxiety symptoms that occur repeatedly during the premenstrual phase
 of the cycle and remit around the onset of menses or shortly thereafter. These symptoms may be
 accompanied by behavioral and physical symptoms. Symptoms must have occurred in most of
 the menstrual cycles during the past year and must have an adverse effect on work or social
 functioning. The intensity and/or expressivity of the accompanying symptoms may be closely
 related to social and cultural background characteristics as well as religious beliefs, social
 tolerance, attitude toward the female reproductive cycle, and female gender role issues more
 generally.
 Typically, symptoms peak around the time of the onset of menses. Although it is not
 uncommon for symptoms to linger into the first few days of menses, the individual must have a
 symptom-free period in the follicular phase after the menstrual period begins. While the core
 symptoms include mood and anxiety symptoms, behavioral and somatic symptoms commonly
 also occur. However, the presence of somatic and/or behavioral symptoms in the absence of
 mood and/or anxious symptoms is not sufficient for a diagnosis. Symptoms are of comparable
 severity (but not duration) to those of other mental disorders, such as a major depressive episode
 or generalized anxiety disorder. In order to confirm a provisional diagnosis, daily prospective
 symptom ratings are required for at least two symptomatic cycles.
 Symptoms must cause clinically significant distress and/or an obvious and marked
 impairment in the ability to function socially or occupationally in the week prior to menses.
 Associated Features
 Delusions and hallucinations have been described in the late luteal phase of the menstrual cycle
 but are rare.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder in the community has been
 estimated at 5.8% based on a large study from Germany. Another study that looked at prevalence
 over two menstrual cycles found 1.3% of menstruating women with the disorder in the United
 States. Estimates based on retrospective reports are often higher than those based on prospective
 daily ratings. Yet, estimates based on a daily record of symptoms for 1–2 months may not be
 fully representative, because those with the most severe symptoms may be unable to sustain the
 rating process. The most rigorous estimate of premenstrual dysphoric disorder prevalence in the
 United States using prospective ratings of two consecutive menstrual cycles was 1.3% for
 women whose symptoms met diagnostic criteria, who experienced functional impairment, and
 had no co-occurring mental disorder. The prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder
 symptoms in adolescent girls may be higher than that observed in adult women.
 Development and Course
 Onset of premenstrual dysphoric disorder can occur at any point after menarche. Incidence of
 new cases over a 40-month follow-up period in Germany is 2.5% (95% confidence interval =
 1.7–3.7). Symptoms cease after menopause, although cyclical hormone replacement can trigger
 the re-expression of symptoms.
199
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Environmental factors associated with the expression of premenstrual dysphoric
 disorder include stress, history of interpersonal trauma, seasonal changes, and sociocultural
 aspects of female sexual behavior in general, and female gender roles in particular.
 Genetic and physiological.
 No studies have examined heritability in premenstrual dysphoric
 disorder specifically. Estimates for heritability of premenstrual dysphoric symptoms range
 between 30% and 80%, although it remains unclear whether the symptoms themselves are
 heritable or whether they are simply associated with other heritable factors or traits.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder has been observed in individuals in the United States, Europe,
 India, Nigeria, Brazil, and Asia, with a broad prevalence range. Nevertheless, as with most
 mental disorders, frequency, intensity, and expressivity of symptoms; perceived consequences;
 help-seeking patterns; and management may be significantly influenced by social and cultural
 factors, such as a history of sexual abuse or domestic violence, limited social support, and
 cultural variations in attitudes toward menstruation.
 Diagnostic Markers
 As indicated earlier, the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder is appropriately confirmed
 by 2 months of prospective symptom ratings. A number of scales, including the Daily Rating of
 Severity of Problems and the Visual Analogue Scales for Premenstrual Mood Symptoms, have
 undergone validation and are commonly used in clinical trials for premenstrual dysphoric
 disorder. The Premenstrual Tension Syndrome Rating Scale has a self-report and an observer
 version, both of which have been validated and used widely to measure illness severity in women
 who have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 The premenstrual phase has been considered by some to be a risk period for suicide.
 Functional Consequences of Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
 Impairment in social functioning may be manifested by discord in the intimate partner
 relationship and problems with children, other family members, or friends that occur only in
 association with the premenstrual dysphoric disorder (i.e., as opposed to chronic interpersonal
 problems). Impairments in work and health-related quality of life are also prominent. There is
 evidence that premenstrual dysphoric disorder can be associated with impairments in function
 and health-related quality of life that are on par with those observed in major depressive disorder
 and persistent depressive disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Premenstrual syndrome.
 Premenstrual syndrome differs from premenstrual dysphoric disorder in
that premenstrual syndrome does not require a minimum of five symptoms nor mood-related
 symptomatology, and it is generally considered to be less severe than premenstrual dysphoric
 disorder. Premenstrual syndrome may be more common than premenstrual dysphoric disorder;
 its estimated prevalence varies with numbers that hover at about 20%. While premenstrual
 syndrome shares the feature of symptom expression during the premenstrual phase of the
 menstrual cycle, the presence of somatic or
 200
 behavioral symptoms, without the required affective symptoms, likely meets criteria for
 premenstrual syndrome and not for premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 Dysmenorrhea.
 Dysmenorrhea is a syndrome of painful menses, but this is distinct from a
 syndrome characterized by affective changes. Moreover, symptoms of dysmenorrhea begin with
 the onset of menses, whereas symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder, by definition, begin
 before the onset of menses, even if they linger into the first few days of menses.
 Bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent depressive disorder.
 Many women with
 (either naturally occurring or substance/medication-induced) bipolar or major depressive disorder
 or persistent depressive disorder believe that they have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 However, when they chart symptoms, they realize that the symptoms do not follow a
 premenstrual pattern. Because the onset of menses constitutes a memorable event, they may
 report that symptoms occur only during the premenstruum or that symptoms worsen
 premenstrually. This is one of the rationales for the requirement that symptoms be confirmed by
 daily prospective ratings. The process of differential diagnosis, particularly if the clinician relies
 on retrospective symptoms only, is made more difficult because of the overlap between
 symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and some other diagnoses. The overlap of
 symptoms is particularly salient for differentiating premenstrual dysphoric disorder from major
 depressive episodes, persistent depressive disorder, bipolar disorders, and borderline personality
 disorder.
 Use of hormonal treatments.
 Some women who present with moderate to severe premenstrual
 symptoms may be using hormonal treatments, including hormonal contraceptives. If such
 symptoms occur after initiation of exogenous hormone use, the symptoms may be attributable to
 the use of hormones rather than to the underlying condition of premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 If the woman stops hormones and the symptoms disappear, then this is consistent with
 substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
 Other medical conditions.
 Women with chronic medical conditions may experience symptoms of
 premenstrual dysphoria. As with any depressive disorder, medical conditions that could better
 account for the symptoms should be ruled out, such as thyroid deficiency and anemia.
 Comorbidity
 A major depressive episode is the most frequently reported previous disorder in individuals
 presenting with premenstrual dysphoric disorder. A wide range of medical conditions (e.g.,
 migraine, asthma, allergies, seizure disorders) or other mental disorders (e.g., depressive and
 bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders, bulimia nervosa, substance use disorders) may worsen in the
premenstrual phase; however, the absence of a symptom-free period during the postmenstrual
 interval obviates a diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. These conditions are better
 considered premenstrual exacerbation of a current mental disorder or medical condition.
 Although the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder should not be assigned in situations
 in which an individual experiences only a premenstrual exacerbation of another mental or
 physical disorder, it can be considered in addition to the diagnosis of another mental disorder or
 medical condition if the individual experiences symptoms and changes in level of functioning
 that are characteristic of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and markedly different from the
 symptoms experienced as part of the ongoing disorder.
 201