Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages)
 and/or behaviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are
 grossly out of proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.
 B. The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
 C. The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week.
 D. The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the
 day, nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers,
 peers).
 E. Criteria A–D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time,
 the individual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without
 all of the symptoms in Criteria A–D.
 F. Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at
 school, with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
 G. The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after
 age 18 years.
 H. By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A–E is before 10 years.
 I. There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the
 full symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanic episode have
 been met.
 Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the
 context of a highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as
 a symptom of mania or hypomania.
 J. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive
 disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism
 spectrum disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder,
 persistent depressive disorder).
 Note: This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder,
 intermittent explosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with
 others, including major depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity
 disorder, conduct disorder, and substance use disorders. Individuals whose
 symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and
oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the diagnosis of disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experienced a manic or
 hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
 should not be assigned.
 K. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
 another medical or neurological condition.
 Diagnostic Features
 The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic severe, persistent
 irritability. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical manifestations, the first of which is
 frequent temper outbursts. These outbursts typically occur in response to frustration and can be
 verbal or behavioral (the latter in the form of aggression against property, self, or others). They
 must occur frequently (i.e., on average, three or more times per week) (Criterion C) over at least
 1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in the home and at school, and they must
 be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B). The second manifestation of severe irritability
 consists of chronic, persistently irritable or angry mood that is present between the severe temper
 outbursts. This irritable or angry mood must be characteristic of the child, being present most of
 the day, nearly every day, and noticeable by others in the child’s environment (Criterion D).
 179
 The clinical presentation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be carefully
 distinguished from presentations of other, related conditions, particularly pediatric bipolar
 disorder. In fact, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder was added to DSM-5 to address the
 considerable concern about the appropriate classification and treatment of children who present
 with chronic, persistent irritability relative to children who present with classic (i.e., episodic)
 bipolar disorder.
 Some researchers view severe, nonepisodic irritability as characteristic of bipolar disorder in
 children, although both DSM-IV and DSM-5 require that both children and adults have distinct
 episodes of mania or hypomania to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. During the
 latter decades of the twentieth century, this contention by researchers that severe, nonepisodic
 irritability is a manifestation of pediatric mania coincided with an upsurge in the rates at which
 clinicians assigned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder to their pediatric patients. This sharp
 increase in rates appears to be attributable to clinicians combining at least two clinical
 presentations into a single category. That is, both classic, episodic presentations of mania and
 nonepisodic presentations of severe irritability have been labeled as bipolar disorder in children.
 In DSM-5, the term bipolar disorder is explicitly reserved for episodic presentations of bipolar
 symptoms. DSM-IV did not include a diagnosis designed to capture youths whose hallmark
 symptoms consisted of very severe, nonepisodic irritability, whereas DSM-5, with the inclusion
 of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, provides a distinct category for such presentations.
 Prevalence
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is common among children presenting to pediatric
mental health clinics. Prevalence estimates of the disorder in the community are unclear. In a
 population-based cohort study of Brazilian 11-year-olds that used a specific module for
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, the prevalence was 2.5%.
 Consistent gender differences in prevalence have not been reported in population samples,
 although clinic samples report a male preponderance. For example, up to 80% of children
 presenting to clinics in Turkey with features of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in a chart
 review were boys. Data suggest that the diagnosis may be more common in younger age groups
 (e.g., 8.2% in a community sample of 6-year-olds in the United States).
 Development and Course
 The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be before age 10 years, and the
 diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of younger than 6 years. It
 is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because the
 symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are likely to change as children mature, use
 of the diagnosis should be restricted to age groups similar to those in which validity has been
 established (6–18 years). Approximately half of children with disruptive mood dysregulation
 disorder living in a predominantly rural area in a large U.S. study continue to have symptoms
 that meet criteria for the condition 1 year later, although those children whose symptoms no
 longer meet the threshold for the diagnosis often have persistent, clinically impairing irritability.
 Rates of conversion from severe, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder are very low.
 Instead, children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are at increased risk to develop
 unipolar depressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Children with chronic irritability typically exhibit complicated psychiatric
 histories. In such children, a relatively extensive history of chronic irritability is common,
 typically manifesting before full criteria for the syndrome are met. Such prediagnostic
 presentations may have qualified for a diagnosis of oppositional defiant
 180
 disorder. Many children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also
 meet criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and for an anxiety disorder,
 with such diagnoses often being present from a relatively early age. For some children, the
 criteria for major depressive disorder may also be met.
 Environmental.
 Factors associated with disrupted family life, such as psychological abuse or
 neglect, parental psychiatric disorder, limited parental education, single-parent household, early
 trauma, death of a parent, parental grief, divorce, and malnutrition (e.g., vitamin deficiency), are
 associated with the core behaviors of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Data suggest that a family history of depression may be a risk factor for
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Consistent with this, twin data suggest that the
 association between early irritability and later unipolar depression and anxiety may be, in part,
 genetically mediated.
 Compared with children with pediatric bipolar disorder or other mental illnesses, those with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder exhibit both commonalities and differences in
 information-processing deficits. For example, face-emotion labeling deficits, as well as perturbed
 decision-making and cognitive control, are present in children with bipolar disorder as well as
 those with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Importantly, however, the same behavioral
 deficit may be associated with different patterns of neural dysfunction. There is also evidence for
 disorder-specific dysfunction, such as during tasks assessing attention deployment in response to
 emotional stimuli, which has demonstrated unique signs of dysfunction in children with chronic
 irritability.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Culture-related data on disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are limited. However,
 sociocultural factors affect the presentation of core psychological features of the disorder,
 including impulsivity as well as emotion, reward, threat, and behavior dysregulation, especially
 in settings characterized by severe social disruption, such as postconflict zones or communities
 affected by long-standing racism and discrimination. It is important to distinguish disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder from adaptive responses to adversity that are context-dependent and
 transitory.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 There is some evidence from twin studies that while irritability has a strong genetic component
 in both sexes, patterns differ for boys and girls. For boys, genetic factors appear to account for an
 increasing amount of the variance of the phenotype of irritability throughout childhood. While
 genetic factors account for a large proportion of the variance of the irritability phenotype in
 school-age girls, this decreases into adolescence and young adulthood, with environmental
 influences playing a greater role. How this genetic risk for irritability translates into risk and
 prognosis for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, per se, is not yet known.
 Functional Consequences of Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
 Chronic, severe irritability, such as is seen in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is
 associated with marked disruption in a child’s family and peer relationships, as well as in school
 performance. Because of their extremely low frustration tolerance, such children generally have
 difficulty succeeding in school; they are often unable to participate in the activities typically
 enjoyed by healthy children; their family life is severely disrupted by their outbursts and
 irritability; and they have trouble initiating or sustaining friendships. Levels of dysfunction in
 children with bipolar disorder and disruptive mood
 181
 dysregulation disorder are generally comparable. Both conditions cause severe disruption in the
 lives of the affected individual and his or her family. In both disruptive mood dysregulation
 disorder and pediatric bipolar disorder, aggression and psychiatric hospitalization are common.
 Differential Diagnosis
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histories,
 the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be made while considering the
 presence or absence of multiple other conditions. Despite the need to consider many other
 syndromes, differentiation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder from bipolar disorder and
 oppositional defiant disorder requires particularly careful assessment.
 Bipolar disorders.
 The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and
 bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core symptoms. In children,
 as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder manifest as an episodic illness with discrete
 episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child’s typical presentation.
 The mood perturbation that occurs during a manic episode is distinctly different from the child’s
 usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be accompanied by
 the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms (e.g.,
 distractibility, increased goal-directed activity), which are also present to a degree that is
 distinctly different from the child’s usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic episode, parents
 (and, depending on developmental level, children) should be able to identify a distinct time
 period during which the child’s mood and behavior were markedly different from usual. In
 contrast, the irritability of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent and is present
 over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irritability is
 characteristic of the child with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while bipolar
 disorders are episodic conditions, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In fact, the
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be assigned to a child who has ever
 experienced a full-duration hypomanic or manic episode (irritable or euphoric) or who has ever
 had a manic or hypomanic episode lasting more than 1 day. Another central differentiating
 feature between bipolar disorders and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is the presence of
 elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common features of mania but
 are not characteristic of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 Oppositional defiant disorder.
 While symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder typically do occur
 in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder are relatively rare in children with oppositional defiant disorder. The key
 features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in children whose
 symptoms also meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are the presence of severe and
 frequently recurrent outbursts and a persistent disruption in mood between outbursts. In addition,
 the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least
 one setting (i.e., home, school, or among peers) and mild to moderate impairment in a second
 setting. For this reason, while most children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria for oppositional defiant
 disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with
 oppositional defiant disorder would criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder be met.
 Moreover, even for children in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the diagnosis of
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the prominent mood
 symptoms in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and the high risk for depressive and anxiety
 disorders in follow-up studies justify placement of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
 among the depressive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional defiant disorder is included in the
 chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
182
 Disorders.”) This reflects the more prominent mood component among individuals with
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional defiant
 disorder. Nevertheless, it also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
 appears to carry a high risk for behavioral problems as well as mood problems.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and
 autism spectrum disorder.
 Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or oppositional defiant disorder—for whom a
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be given even if the symptoms meet
 diagnostic criteria for that disorder—children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder also can receive a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive
 disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in the
 context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder should receive one of
 those diagnoses rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Children with disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder may have symptoms that also meet criteria for an anxiety disorder
 and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose irritability is manifest only in the context of
 exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should receive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather
 than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In addition, children with autism spectrum
 disorders frequently present with temper outbursts when, for example, their routines are
 disturbed. In that instance, the temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the autism
 spectrum disorder, and the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder.
 Intermittent explosive disorder.
 Children with symptoms suggestive of intermittent explosive
 disorder present with instances of severe temper outbursts, much like children with disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
 intermittent explosive disorder does not require the individual’s mood to be persistently irritable
 or angry between outbursts. In addition, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder involving
 verbal aggression or physical aggression that does not result in damage to property or physical
 injury to animals or other individuals occurring at least twice weekly can be made after only 3
 months of symptoms, in contrast to the 12-month requirement for disruptive mood dysregulation
 disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For children with
 outbursts and intercurrent, persistent irritability, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder should be made.
 Comorbidity
 Rates of comorbidity in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are extremely high. It is rare to
 find individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder alone.
 Comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and other DSM-defined
 syndromes appears higher than for many other pediatric mental illnesses; the strongest overlap is
 with oppositional defiant disorder. Not only is the overall rate of comorbidity high in disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder, but also the range of comorbid illnesses appears particularly
 diverse. These children typically present to the clinic with a wide range of disruptive behavior,
 mood, anxiety, and even autism spectrum symptoms and diagnoses. However, children with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not have symptoms that meet criteria for bipolar
 disorder, as in that context, only the bipolar disorder diagnosis should be made. If children have
 symptoms that meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder or intermittent explosive disorder
 and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
 disorder should be assigned. Also, as noted earlier, the diagnosis of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder should not be assigned if the symptoms occur only in an anxiety
provoking context, when the routines of a child with autism spectrum disorder or obsessive
compulsive disorder are disturbed, or in the context of a major depressive episode.
 183