Differential Diagnosis
 Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition.
 Determination of whether a medical
 condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends on a) the absence
 of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical condition, b) the
 probability that the associated medical condition has a potential to promote or cause a depressive
 disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly after the onset or worsening of the
 medical condition, especially if the depressive symptoms remit near the time that the medical
 disorder is effectively treated or remits.
 Medication-induced depressive disorder.
 An important caveat is that some medical conditions are
 treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic
 symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is the best way to
 try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e.,
 association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).
 Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 A separate diagnosis of depressive disorder due
 to another medical condition is not given if the depressive disturbance occurs exclusively during
 the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to another medical
 condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the
 depressive disturbance is judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process
 causing the neurocognitive disorder and if symptoms of depression are a prominent part of the
 clinical presentation.
 Adjustment disorders.
 It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an adjustment
 disorder, as the onset of the medical condition is in itself a life stressor that could
 209
 bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major
 differentiating elements are the pervasiveness of the depressive picture and the number and
 quality of the depressive symptoms that the individual reports or demonstrates on the mental
Demoralization.
 status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but
 largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
 Demoralization is a common reaction to chronic medical illness. It is marked by
 a sense of subjective incompetence, helplessness, and hopelessness, and a desire to give up. It is
 often accompanied by depressive symptoms such as low mood and fatigue. Demoralization
 typically lacks the anhedonia associated with depressive disorder due to another medical
 condition, and individuals will generally find pleasure in previously meaningful activities and be
 able to experience moments of happiness.