Differential Diagnosis
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histories,
 the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be made while considering the
 presence or absence of multiple other conditions. Despite the need to consider many other
 syndromes, differentiation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder from bipolar disorder and
 oppositional defiant disorder requires particularly careful assessment.
 Bipolar disorders.
 The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and
 bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core symptoms. In children,
 as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder manifest as an episodic illness with discrete
 episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child’s typical presentation.
 The mood perturbation that occurs during a manic episode is distinctly different from the child’s
 usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be accompanied by
 the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms (e.g.,
 distractibility, increased goal-directed activity), which are also present to a degree that is
 distinctly different from the child’s usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic episode, parents
 (and, depending on developmental level, children) should be able to identify a distinct time
 period during which the child’s mood and behavior were markedly different from usual. In
 contrast, the irritability of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent and is present
 over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irritability is
 characteristic of the child with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while bipolar
 disorders are episodic conditions, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In fact, the
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be assigned to a child who has ever
 experienced a full-duration hypomanic or manic episode (irritable or euphoric) or who has ever
 had a manic or hypomanic episode lasting more than 1 day. Another central differentiating
 feature between bipolar disorders and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is the presence of
 elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common features of mania but
 are not characteristic of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 Oppositional defiant disorder.
 While symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder typically do occur
 in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder are relatively rare in children with oppositional defiant disorder. The key
 features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in children whose
 symptoms also meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are the presence of severe and
 frequently recurrent outbursts and a persistent disruption in mood between outbursts. In addition,
 the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least
 one setting (i.e., home, school, or among peers) and mild to moderate impairment in a second
 setting. For this reason, while most children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria for oppositional defiant
 disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with
 oppositional defiant disorder would criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder be met.
 Moreover, even for children in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the diagnosis of
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the prominent mood
 symptoms in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and the high risk for depressive and anxiety
 disorders in follow-up studies justify placement of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
 among the depressive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional defiant disorder is included in the
 chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
182
 Disorders.”) This reflects the more prominent mood component among individuals with
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional defiant
 disorder. Nevertheless, it also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
 appears to carry a high risk for behavioral problems as well as mood problems.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and
 autism spectrum disorder.
 Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or oppositional defiant disorder—for whom a
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be given even if the symptoms meet
 diagnostic criteria for that disorder—children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder also can receive a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive
 disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in the
 context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder should receive one of
 those diagnoses rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Children with disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder may have symptoms that also meet criteria for an anxiety disorder
 and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose irritability is manifest only in the context of
 exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should receive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather
 than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In addition, children with autism spectrum
 disorders frequently present with temper outbursts when, for example, their routines are
 disturbed. In that instance, the temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the autism
 spectrum disorder, and the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder.
 Intermittent explosive disorder.
 Children with symptoms suggestive of intermittent explosive
 disorder present with instances of severe temper outbursts, much like children with disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
 intermittent explosive disorder does not require the individual’s mood to be persistently irritable
 or angry between outbursts. In addition, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder involving
 verbal aggression or physical aggression that does not result in damage to property or physical
 injury to animals or other individuals occurring at least twice weekly can be made after only 3
 months of symptoms, in contrast to the 12-month requirement for disruptive mood dysregulation
 disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For children with
 outbursts and intercurrent, persistent irritability, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder should be made.


 