Differential Diagnosis
 Manic episodes with irritable mood or with mixed features.
 Major depressive episodes with prominent
 irritable mood may be difficult to distinguish from manic episodes with irritable mood or with
 mixed features. This distinction requires a careful clinical evaluation of the presence of sufficient
 manic symptoms to meet threshold criteria (i.e., three if mood is manic, four if mood is irritable
 but not manic).
 Bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or other specified bipolar and related disorder.
 Major 
depressive
 episodes along with a history of a manic or hypomanic episode preclude the diagnosis of major
 depressive disorder. Major depressive episodes with a history of hypomanic episodes and
 without a history of manic episodes indicate a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, whereas major
 depressive episodes with a history of manic episodes (with or without hypomanic episodes)
 indicate a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. On the other hand, presentations of major depressive
 episodes with a history of periods of hypomania that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic
 episode may be diagnosed as either other specified bipolar and related disorder or major
 depressive disorder depending on where the clinician judges the presentation to best fall. For
 example, the presentation may be best considered other specified bipolar and related disorder
 because of the clinical significance of the subthreshold hypomanic symptoms, or the presentation
 may be best considered a case of major depressive disorder with some subthreshold hypomanic
 symptoms in between episodes.
 Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
 A diagnosis of depressive disorder due to
 another medical condition requires the presence of an etiological medical condition. Major
depressive disorder is not diagnosed if the major depressive–like episodes are all attributable to
 the direct pathophysiological consequence of a specific medical condition (e.g., multiple
 sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism).
 Substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
 This disorder is distinguished from major
 depressive disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin)
 appears to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance. For example, depressed mood that
 occurs only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as cocaine-induced
 depressive disorder.
 Persistent depressive disorder.
 Persistent depressive disorder is characterized by depressed mood,
 more days than not, for at least 2 years. If criteria are met for both major depressive disorder and
 persistent depressive disorder, both can be diagnosed.
 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is characterized by dysphoric
 mood that is present in the final week before the onset of menses, that starts to improve within a
 few days after the onset of menses, and that becomes minimal or absent in the week postmenses.
 By contrast, the episodes of major depressive disorder are not temporally connected to the
 menstrual cycle.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by
 severe, recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally and/or behaviorally, accompanied by
 persistent or labile mood, most of the day, nearly every day, in between the outbursts. In
 contrast, in major depressive disorder, irritability is confined to the major depressive episodes.
 Major depressive episodes superimposed on schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
 schizophreniform disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
 psychotic disorder.
 Depressive symptoms may be present during schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
 schizophreniform disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
 psychotic disorder. Most commonly, such depressive symptoms can be considered associated
 features of these disorders and do not merit a
 192
 separate diagnosis. However, when the depressive symptoms meet full criteria for a major
 depressive episode, a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder may be made in addition to
 the diagnosis of the psychotic disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder differs from major depressive disorder, with
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 psychotic features, by the requirement that in schizoaffective disorder, delusions or
 hallucinations are present for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major depressive episode.
 Distractibility and low frustration tolerance can occur in
 both attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and a major depressive episode; if the
 criteria are met for both, ADHD may be diagnosed in addition to the mood disorder. However,
 the clinician must be cautious not to overdiagnose a major depressive episode in children with
 ADHD whose disturbance in mood is characterized by irritability rather than by sadness or loss
 of interest.
 Adjustment disorder with depressed mood.
 A major depressive episode that occurs in response to a
 psychosocial stressor is distinguished from adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, by the
Bereavement.
 Sadness.
 F34.1
 fact that the full criteria for a major depressive episode are not met in adjustment disorder.
 Bereavement is the experience of losing a loved one to death. It generally triggers
 a grief response that may be intense and may involve many features that overlap with symptoms
 characteristic of a major depressive episode, such as sadness, difficulty sleeping, and poor
 concentration. Features that help differentiate a bereavement-related grief response from a major
 depressive episode include the following: the predominant affects in grief are feelings of
 emptiness and loss, whereas in a major depressive episode they are persistent depressed mood
 and a diminished ability to experience pleasure. Moreover, the dysphoric mood of grief is likely
 to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves that tend to be associated with
 thoughts or reminders of the deceased, whereas the depressed mood in a major depressive
 episode is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. It is important to
 note that in a vulnerable individual (e.g., someone with a past history of major depressive
 disorder), bereavement may trigger not only a grief response but also the development of an
 episode of depression or the worsening of an existing episode.
 Finally, periods of sadness are inherent aspects of the human experience. These
 periods should not be diagnosed as a major depressive episode unless criteria are met for severity
 (i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2
 weeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagnosis other specified
 depressive disorder may be appropriate for presentations of depressed mood with clinically
 significant impairment that do not meet criteria for duration or severity.
