Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 If there is a depressed mood for more days than not plus two or more
 persistent depressive disorder Criterion B symptoms for 2 years or more, then the diagnosis of
 persistent depressive disorder is made. If the symptom criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a
 major depressive episode at any time during this period, then the additional diagnosis of major
 depression should be made. The comorbid presence of major depressive episodes during this
 period should also be noted by assigning the appropriate course specifier to the persistent
 depressive disorder diagnosis as follows: If the individual’s symptoms currently meet full criteria
 for a major depressive episode, and there have been periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the
 preceding 2 years with symptoms below the threshold for a full major depressive episode, then
 the specifier “with intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode” would be
 assigned. If full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met but there has been
 one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years, then the specifier “with
 intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode” is assigned. If a major
 depressive episode
 196
 has persisted for at least a 2-year duration and remains present, then the specifier “with persistent
 major depressive episode” is used. If the individual has not experienced an episode of major
 depression in the last 2 years, then the specifier “with pure dysthymic syndrome” is used.
 Other specified depressive disorder.
 Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include
 symptoms (i.e., markedly diminished interest or pleasure in activities; psychomotor agitation or
 retardation; recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, suicide attempt or plan) that are absent
 from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (i.e., depressed mood and two out of six
 Criterion B symptoms), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that
 have persisted longer than 2 years but that do not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder.
 If full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some point during the current
 episode of illness, a diagnosis of major depressive disorder would apply. Otherwise, a diagnosis
 of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder should be given.
 Bipolar I and bipolar II disorders.
 A history of a manic or hypomanic episode precludes the
 diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder. A history of manic episodes (with or without
 hypomanic episodes) indicates a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. A history of hypomanic episodes
 (without any history of manic episodes in individuals with persistent depressive presentations
 during which criteria have been met for a major depressive episode) warrants a diagnosis of
 bipolar II disorder. Other specified bipolar disorder applies to individuals whose presentations
 include a history of hypomanic episodes along with persistent depressive presentation that has
 never met full criteria for a major depressive episode.
 Cyclothymic disorder.
 A diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder precludes the diagnosis of persistent
 depressive disorder. Thus, if during the period lasting at least 2 years of depressed mood for most
 of the day, for more days than not, 1) there are numerous periods with hypomanic symptoms that
 do not meet criteria for a hypomanic episode, 2) there have not been any symptom-free periods
 of more than 2 months at a time, and 3) criteria have never been met for a major depressive,
 manic, or hypomanic episode, then the diag-nosis would be cyclothymic disorder instead of
Psychotic disorders.
 Depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder.
 Personality disorders.
 F32.81
 persistent depressive disorder.
 Depressive symptoms are a common associated feature of chronic psychotic
 disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder). A separate
 diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is not made if the symptoms occur only during the
 course of the psychotic disorder (including residual phases).
 Persistent depressive
 disorder must be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
 medical condition. The diagnosis is depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
 medical condition if the mood disturbance is judged, based on history, physical examination, or
 laboratory findings, to be attributable to the direct pathophysiological effects of a specific,
 usually chronic, medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis). If it is judged that the depressive
 symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition, then the
 primary mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder) is recorded, and the medical
 condition is noted as a concomitant medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus).
 A substance/medication
induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder is distinguished from persistent depressive
 disorder when a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) is judged to be
 etiologically related to the mood disturbance.
 A personality disorder is characterized by an enduring pattern of inner
 experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of the
 197
 individual’s culture, with onset by adolescence or early adulthood. Personality disorders
 commonly co-occur with persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are met for persistent
 depressive disorder and a personality disorder, both may be diagnosed.


 