Differential Diagnosis
 Premenstrual syndrome.
 Premenstrual syndrome differs from premenstrual dysphoric disorder in
that premenstrual syndrome does not require a minimum of five symptoms nor mood-related
 symptomatology, and it is generally considered to be less severe than premenstrual dysphoric
 disorder. Premenstrual syndrome may be more common than premenstrual dysphoric disorder;
 its estimated prevalence varies with numbers that hover at about 20%. While premenstrual
 syndrome shares the feature of symptom expression during the premenstrual phase of the
 menstrual cycle, the presence of somatic or
 200
 behavioral symptoms, without the required affective symptoms, likely meets criteria for
 premenstrual syndrome and not for premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 Dysmenorrhea.
 Dysmenorrhea is a syndrome of painful menses, but this is distinct from a
 syndrome characterized by affective changes. Moreover, symptoms of dysmenorrhea begin with
 the onset of menses, whereas symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder, by definition, begin
 before the onset of menses, even if they linger into the first few days of menses.
 Bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent depressive disorder.
 Many women with
 (either naturally occurring or substance/medication-induced) bipolar or major depressive disorder
 or persistent depressive disorder believe that they have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 However, when they chart symptoms, they realize that the symptoms do not follow a
 premenstrual pattern. Because the onset of menses constitutes a memorable event, they may
 report that symptoms occur only during the premenstruum or that symptoms worsen
 premenstrually. This is one of the rationales for the requirement that symptoms be confirmed by
 daily prospective ratings. The process of differential diagnosis, particularly if the clinician relies
 on retrospective symptoms only, is made more difficult because of the overlap between
 symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and some other diagnoses. The overlap of
 symptoms is particularly salient for differentiating premenstrual dysphoric disorder from major
 depressive episodes, persistent depressive disorder, bipolar disorders, and borderline personality
 disorder.
 Use of hormonal treatments.
 Some women who present with moderate to severe premenstrual
 symptoms may be using hormonal treatments, including hormonal contraceptives. If such
 symptoms occur after initiation of exogenous hormone use, the symptoms may be attributable to
 the use of hormones rather than to the underlying condition of premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
 If the woman stops hormones and the symptoms disappear, then this is consistent with
 substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
 Other medical conditions.
 Women with chronic medical conditions may experience symptoms of
 premenstrual dysphoria. As with any depressive disorder, medical conditions that could better
 account for the symptoms should be ruled out, such as thyroid deficiency and anemia.


 