Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and withdrawal.
 Depressive symptoms occur commonly in substance
 intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of substance-induced depressive disorder
 should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal when
 the mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For
 example, dysphoric mood is a characteristic feature of cocaine withdrawal. Substance-induced
 depressive disorder with onset during withdrawal should be diagnosed instead of cocaine
 withdrawal only if the mood disturbance in Criterion A predominates in the clinical picture and
 is sufficiently severe to be a separate focus of attention and treatment.
 Independent depressive disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is
 distinguished from an independent depressive disorder by the fact that even though a substance is
 taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related to the symptoms, if the
 depressive syndrome is observed at times other than when the substance or medication is being
 used, it should be diagnosed as an independent depressive disorder.
 Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
 Because individuals with medical conditions
 often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the
 mood symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical condition rather
 than the medication, in which case depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
 diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change
 in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
 be needed to determine empirically whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician
 has ascertained that the disturbance is a function of both another medical condition and substance
 use or withdrawal, then both diagnoses (i.e., depressive disorder due to another medical
condition and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder) may be given. When there is
 insufficient evidence to determine whether the depressive symptoms are associated with
 substance (including a medication) ingestion or withdrawal or with another medical condition or
 are independent (i.e., not a function of either a substance or another medical condition), a
 diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is indicated.
 