Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Following cessation of use of a hallucinogen, the reexperiencing of one or more
 of the perceptual symptoms that were experienced while intoxicated with the
 hallucinogen (e.g., geometric hallucinations, false perceptions of movement in
 the peripheral visual fields, flashes of color, intensified colors, trails of images of
 moving objects, positive afterimages, halos around objects, macropsia and
 micropsia).
 F16.983
 B. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition (e.g., anatomical
 lesions and infections of the brain, visual epilepsies) and are not better explained
 by another mental disorder (e.g., delirium, major neurocognitive disorder,
 schizophrenia) or hypnopompic hallucinations.
 Diagnostic Features
 The hallmark of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder is the reexperiencing, when the
 individual is sober, of the perceptual disturbances that were experienced while the individual was
 intoxicated with the hallucinogen (Criterion A). The symptoms may include any perceptual
 perturbations, but visual disturbances tend to be predominant. Typical of the abnormal visual
 perceptions are geometric hallucinations, false perceptions of
 599
 movement in the peripheral visual fields, flashes of color, intensified colors, trails of images of
 moving objects (i.e., images left suspended in the path of a moving object as seen in stroboscopic
photography), perceptions of entire objects, visual snow, positive afterimages (i.e., a same
colored or complementary-colored “shadow” of an object remaining after removal of the object),
 halos around objects, or misperception of images as too large (macropsia) or too small
 (micropsia). Duration of the visual disturbances may be episodic or nearly continuous and must
 cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
 areas of functioning (Criterion B). The disturbances may last for weeks, months, or years. Other
 explanations for the disturbances (e.g., brain lesions, preexisting psychosis, seizure disorders,
 migraine aura without headaches) must be ruled out (Criterion C).
 Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder occurs primarily after LSD (lysergic acid
 diethylamide) use, but not exclusively. There does not appear to be a strong correlation between
 hallucinogen persisting perception disorder and number of occasions of hallucinogen use, with
 some instances of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder occurring in individuals with
 minimal exposure to hallucinogens. Some instances of hallucinogen persisting perception
 disorder may be triggered by use of other substances (e.g., cannabis or alcohol), adaptation to
 dark environments, exercise, and exposure to noise and photophobia.
 Associated Features
 Reality testing remains intact in individuals with hallucinogen persisting perception disorder
 (i.e., the individual is aware that the disturbance is linked to the effect of the drug). If this is not
 the case, another disorder might better explain the abnormal perceptions.
 Prevalence
 Prevalence estimates of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder are unknown. Initial
 prevalence estimates of the disorder among individuals who use hallucinogens is approximately
 4.2%.
 Development and Course
 Little is known about the development of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. Its course,
 as suggested by its name, is persistent, lasting for weeks, months, or even years in certain
 individuals.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 There is little evidence regarding risk factors for hallucinogen persisting perception disorder,
 although genetic factors have been suggested as a possible explanation underlying the
 susceptibility to LSD effects in this condition.
 Functional Consequences of Hallucinogen Persisting Perception
 Disorder
 Although hallucinogen persisting perception disorder remains a chronic condition in some cases,
 many individuals with the disorder are able to suppress the disturbances and continue to function
 normally.
 Differential Diagnosis
Conditions to be ruled out include schizophrenia, other drug effects, neurodegenerative
 disorders, stroke, brain tumors, infections, and head trauma. Neuroimaging results in
 hallucinogen persisting perception disorder cases are typically negative. As noted earlier, reality
 testing remains intact (i.e., the individual is aware that the disturbance is linked to the
 600
 effect of the drug); if this is not the case, another disorder (e.g., psychotic disorder, another
 medical condition) might better explain the abnormal perceptions.
 Comorbidity
 Common comorbid mental disorders accompanying hallucinogen persisting perception disorder
 are panic disorder, alcohol use disorder, major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, and
 schizophrenia spectrum disorders.