Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent use of a hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine).
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
 marked anxiety or depression, ideas of reference, fear of “losing one’s mind,”
 paranoid ideation, impaired judgment) that developed during, or shortly after,
 hallucinogen use.
 C. Perceptual changes occurring in a state of full wakefulness and alertness (e.g.,
 subjective intensification of perceptions, depersonalization, derealization,
 illusions, hallucinations, synesthesias) that developed during, or shortly after,
 hallucinogen use.
 D. Two (or more) of the following signs developing during, or shortly after,
 hallucinogen use:
 1. Pupillary dilation.
 2. Tachycardia.
 3. Sweating.
 4. Palpitations.
 5. Blurring of vision.
 6. Tremors.
 7. Incoordination.
 E. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 597
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid
 hallucinogen use disorder. If a mild hallucinogen use disorder is comorbid, the ICD
10-CM code is F16.120, and if a moderate or severe hallucinogen use disorder is
 comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.220. If there is no comorbid hallucinogen use
 disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.920.
 Note: For information on Associated Features and Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,
 see the corresponding sections in Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 Other hallucinogen intoxication reflects the clinically significant behavioral or psychological
 changes that occur shortly after ingestion of a hallucinogen. Depending on the specific
 hallucinogen, the intoxication may last only minutes (e.g., for salvia) or several hours or longer
 (e.g., for LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] or MDMA [3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine]).
 Prevalence
The prevalence of other hallucinogen intoxication is not fully known but may be approximated
 based on the prevalence of use of the substances. In 2018, 1.5% of individuals ages 12–17 years
 in the United States reported use of hallucinogens in the past year; among individuals ages 18
25, the rate was 6.9%, and among those age 26 or older, the rate was 1.3%. Rates were
 consistently higher for boys and men than for girls and women in every age group.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Other hallucinogen intoxication may lead to increased suicidal thoughts or behavior, although
 suicide is rare among individuals who use hallucinogens. Of note, a study of more than 135,000
 randomly selected U.S. adults, including more than 19,000 individuals who use psychedelics, did
 not find evidence, after adjustment for sociodemographics, other drug use, and childhood
 depression, that lifetime psychedelic use is an independent risk factor for mental health
 problems, suicidal thoughts, or suicide attempts. In addition, one large U.S. population survey
 found that a lifetime history of hallucinogen use was associated with lower odds of mental
 distress and suicidal thoughts or behavior, although a causal relationship between hallucinogenic
 drugs and lower distress cannot be inferred from this study. On the basis of these findings, the
 relationship of other hallucinogen use to suicidal thoughts and behaviors is uncertain.
 Functional Consequences of Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
 Other hallucinogen intoxication can have serious consequences. The perceptual disturbances and
 impaired judgment associated with other hallucinogen intoxication can result in injuries or
 fatalities from automobile crashes, physical fights, or unintentional self-injury (e.g., cuts or falls
 from impaired depth perception). When other hallucinogens are consumed in combination with
 other drugs (including alcohol), coma can occur, with the duration and profundity of coma
 greater than when other hallucinogens are taken alone. Continued use of hallucinogens,
 particularly MDMA, has also been linked with neurotoxic effects. Adverse effects of other
 hallucinogen use include hyperthermia, cardiac tachyarrhythmias, pneumothorax hypernatremia,
 motor incoordination, nystagmus, restlessness, hallucinations/delusions, mydriasis, increased
 alertness, and high blood pressure. More serious reactions include renal failure, hepatic failure,
 seizures, cerebral infarction, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac complications, and hepatotoxicity.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other substance intoxication.
 598
 Other hallucinogen intoxication should be differentiated from
 intoxication with amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, or other stimulants; anticholinergics,
 inhalants, and phencyclidine. Toxicological tests are useful in making this distinction, and
 determining the route of administration may also be useful.
 Other conditions.
 Other disorders and conditions to be considered include schizophrenia,
 depression, withdrawal from other drugs (e.g., sedatives, alcohol), certain metabolic disorders
 (e.g., hypoglycemia), seizure disorders, tumors of the central nervous system, and vascular
 insults.
 Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder.
 Other hallucinogen intoxication is distinguished from
Hallucinogen-induced mental disorders.
 hallucinogen persisting perception disorder because the symptoms in the latter continue
 episodically or continuously for weeks (or longer) after the most recent intoxication.
 Other hallucinogen intoxication is distinguished from
 hallucinogen-induced mental disorders (e.g., hallucinogen-induced anxiety disorder, with onset
 during intoxication) because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess
 of those usually associated with other hallucinogen intoxication, predominate in the clinical
 presentation, and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of other hallucinogen intoxication with other hallucinogen use
 disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder for more details about co
occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.