Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine) use leading to
 clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the
 following, occurring within a 12-month period:
 1. The hallucinogen is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
 was intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 hallucinogen use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the hallucinogen,
 use the hallucinogen, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen.
 5. Recurrent hallucinogen use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations
 at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or poor work
 performance related to hallucinogen use; hallucinogen-related absences,
 suspensions, or expulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
 6. Continued hallucinogen use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the
 hallucinogen (e.g., arguments with a spouse about consequences of
 intoxication; physical fights).
 591
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of hallucinogen use.
 8. Recurrent hallucinogen use in situations in which it is physically hazardous
 (e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by the
 hallucinogen).
 9. Hallucinogen use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by the hallucinogen.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the hallucinogen to achieve
 intoxication or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 the hallucinogen.
 Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for hallucinogens, and so
 this criterion does not apply.
 Specify the particular hallucinogen.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder have
 been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception
 that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen,”
 may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder
 were previously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder
 have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the
 exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the
 hallucinogen,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to hallucinogens is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If a hallucinogen intoxication or
 another hallucinogen-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
 below for hallucinogen use disorder. Instead, the comorbid hallucinogen use
 disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the hallucinogen-induced disorder code
 (see the coding note for hallucinogen intoxication or specific hallucinogen-induced
 mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid hallucinogen-induced psychotic
 disorder and hallucinogen use disorder, only the hallucinogen-induced psychotic
 disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid
 hallucinogen use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild
 hallucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder or F16.259
 for a moderate or severe hallucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced
 psychotic disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
 F16.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F16.11 Mild, In early remission
 F16.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F16.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F16.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F16.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F16.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F16.21 Severe, In early remission
 F16.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 592
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Diagnostic Features
 Hallucinogens comprise a diverse group of substances that despite having different chemical
 structures and possibly involving different molecular mechanisms, produce similar alterations of
 perception, mood, and cognition in users. Hallucinogens included are phenylalkylamines (e.g.,
 mescaline, 
DOM [2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine], 
and 
MDMA [3,4
methylenedioxymethamphetamine; also called “ecstasy” or “molly”]); the indoleamines,
 including psilocybin (and its metabolite psilocin, the compound primarily responsible for the
 psychedelic effects of hallucinogenic mushrooms) and dimethyltryptamine (DMT); and the
 ergolines, such as LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) and morning glory seeds. In addition,
 miscellaneous other ethnobotanical compounds are classified as hallucinogens, of which Salvia
 divinorum and jimsonweed are two examples. Excluded from the hallucinogen group are
 cannabis and its active compound, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) (see the section
 “Cannabis-Related Disorders”). These substances can have hallucinogenic effects but are
 diagnosed separately because of significant differences in their psychological and behavioral
 effects.
 Hallucinogens are usually taken orally, although some forms are smoked (e.g., DMT, salvia)
 or (rarely) taken intranasally or by injection (e.g., ecstasy). Duration of effects varies across
 types of hallucinogens. Some of these substances (i.e., LSD, MDMA) have a long half-life and
 extended duration such that users may spend hours to days using and/or recovering from the
 effects of these drugs. However, other hallucinogenic drugs (e.g., DMT, salvia) are short acting.
 Tolerance to hallucinogens develops with repeated use and has been reported to have both
 autonomic and psychological effects.
MDMA/ecstasy as a hallucinogen may have distinctive effects attributable to both its
 hallucinogenic and its stimulant properties. Ecstasy users have a higher risk of developing a
 hallucinogen use disorder than those using other hallucinogens. Among both adolescent and
 adult ecstasy users and users of other hallucinogens, the most frequently reported hallucinogen
 use disorder criteria are tolerance, hazardous use, use despite emotional or health problems,
 giving up activities in favor of use, and spending a lot of time obtaining, using, or recovering
 from the effects of use. As found for other substances, diagnostic criteria for other hallucinogen
 use disorder are arrayed along a single continuum of severity.
 Given that a clinically significant withdrawal syndrome has not been consistently
 documented in humans, the diagnosis of hallucinogen withdrawal syndrome is not included in
 this manual and therefore is not part of the hallucinogen use disorder diagnostic criteria.
 However, there may be evidence of withdrawal from MDMA, with endorsement of any two or
 more withdrawal symptoms (e.g., malaise, appetite disturbance, mood changes [anxious,
 depressed, irritable], poor concentration, sleep disruption) or withdrawal avoidance observed in
 more than half of individuals in diverse samples of ecstasy users in the United States and
 internationally.
 Associated Features
 The characteristic symptom features of use of some hallucinogens can aid in diagnosis if urine or
 blood toxicology results are not available. For example, individuals who use LSD tend to
 experience visual hallucinations that can be frightening.
 Prevalence
 Other hallucinogen use disorder is rare. In the U.S. general population, about 0.1% of individuals
 age 12 or older endorsed the symptoms of past 12-month hallucinogen use disorder in 2018. The
 rate was 0.2% among those ages 12–17, 0.4% among those ages 18–25,
 593
 and < 0.1% among those age 26 and older. Prevalence is higher in U.S. clinical samples (e.g.,
 19% in adolescents in treatment), and among select groups of individuals who use hallucinogens
 frequently (e.g., recent heavy ecstasy use) in the United States and Australia, 73.5% of adults and
 77% of adolescents have a problematic pattern of use that may meet other hallucinogen use
 disorder criteria.
 Development and Course
 Prevalence of other hallucinogen use disorder by age among adolescents is unknown. Among
 U.S. adults age 18 years and older, most (90%) of those with other hallucinogen use disorder are
 ages 18–29, suggesting that the disorder is not often persistent and is concentrated in young
 adults.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 The use of specific hallucinogens (i.e., ecstasy, salvia) has been linked with high
sensation-seeking.
 Environmental.
 On the basis of research in the United States, environmental risk factors of other
 hallucinogen use disorder include higher income, lower education, being never married, and
 residing in urban areas. Early onset of hallucinogen use has also been linked to transition to
 hallucinogen use disorder. Peer use of other drugs is also highly associated with ecstasy and
 salvia use.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Among male twins, total variance due to additive genetics has been
 estimated to range from 26% to 79%, with inconsistent evidence for shared environmental
 influences.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Historically, hallucinogens have been used as part of established religious or spiritual practices,
 such as the use of peyote in the Native American Church and in Mexico. Ritual use by
 Indigenous populations of psilocybin obtained from certain types of mushrooms has occurred in
 South America, Mexico, and some areas in the United States, or of ayahuasca in the Santo
 Daime and União de Vegetal religious groups.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Among U.S. adolescents, boys have greater 12-month prevalence rates of other hallucinogen use
 than girls, and these gender differences extend to specific hallucinogens, including LSD,
 MDMA, psilocybin, and salvia divinorum. Among U.S. adults, 60% of individuals with other
 hallucinogen use disorder are men. International research suggests that women administered
 MDMA may have greater subjective effects, such as altered state of consciousness, anxiety, and
 depression. No information from international studies is available regarding gender differences
 for other hallucinogen use disorder.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory testing can be useful in distinguishing among the different hallucinogens. However,
 because some agents (e.g., LSD) are so potent that as little as 75 micrograms can produce severe
 reactions, typical toxicological examination will not always reveal which substance has been
 used.
 Functional Consequences of Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
 Although insufficient information exists to clearly note the functional consequences of other
 hallucinogen use disorder, complications of use of these substances have been
 594
 identified. Adverse effects of other hallucinogen use include those related to intoxication, such as
 hyperthermia, cardiac tachyarrhythmias, pneumothorax hypernatremia, motor incoordination,
 nystagmus, restlessness, hallucinations/delusions, mydriasis, increased alertness, and high blood
 pressure. Other more serious reactions related to consequences of repeated use of other
 hallucinogens include renal failure, hepatic failure, seizures, cerebral infarction, rhabdomyolysis,
Other substance disorders.
 Hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-induced mental disorders.
 Independent mental disorders.
 cardiac complications, and hepatotoxicity.
 There is evidence for persisting neurotoxic effects of MDMA/ecstasy use, including
 impairments in memory, psychological function, and neuroendocrine function; serotonin system
 dysfunction; and sleep disturbance; as well as adverse effects on brain microvasculature, white
 matter maturation, and damage to axons.
 Differential Diagnosis
 The effects of hallucinogen use must be distinguished from those of
 other substances (e.g., amphetamine use disorder, alcohol or sedative withdrawal), especially
 because contamination of the hallucinogens with other drugs is relatively common.
 Hallucinogen use disorder is
 differentiated from hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-induced mental disorders (e.g.,
 hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder) in that hallucinogen use disorder describes a
 problematic pattern of hallucinogen use that involves impaired control over hallucinogen use,
 social impairment attributable to hallucinogen use, risky hallucinogen use (e.g., driving while
 intoxicated), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance), whereas
 hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen
induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with hallucinogen use disorder. In such
 cases, a diagnosis of hallucinogen intoxication or a hallucinogen-induced mental disorder should
 be given in addition to a diagnosis of hallucinogen use disorder, the presence of which is
 indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Some of the effects of hallucinogen use may resemble symptoms of
 independent psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia and depressive and bipolar disorders.
 Discerning whether symptoms occurred before the intake of the drug is important in the
 differentiation of acute drug effects from a preexisting mental disorder. In particular,
 schizophrenia should be ruled out, as some affected individuals (e.g., individuals with
 schizophrenia who exhibit paranoia) may falsely attribute their symptoms to use of
 hallucinogens.
 Comorbidity
 Other hallucinogen use disorder is highly associated with cocaine use disorder, stimulant use
 disorder, other substance use disorder, tobacco (nicotine) use disorder, any personality disorder,
 posttraumatic stress disorder, and panic attacks.