Phencyclidine Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A pattern of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance) use
 leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least
 two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
 1. Phencyclidine is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
 was intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 phencyclidine use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain phencyclidine,
 use the phencyclidine, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use phencyclidine.
 5. Recurrent phencyclidine use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role
 obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or
 poor work performance related to phencyclidine use; phencyclidine-related
 absences, suspensions, or expulsions from school; neglect of children or
 household).
 6. Continued phencyclidine use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the
 phencyclidine (e.g., arguments with a spouse about consequences of
 intoxication; physical fights).
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of phencyclidine use.
8. Recurrent phencyclidine use in situations in which it is physically hazardous
 (e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by a
 phencyclidine).
 9. Phencyclidine use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by the phencyclidine.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the phencyclidine to achieve
 intoxication or desired effect.
 588
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 the phencyclidine.
 Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for phencyclidines, and
 so this criterion does not apply. (Withdrawal from phencyclidines has been reported
 in animals but not documented in human users.)
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met
 for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that
 Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may
 be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met
 at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that
 Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may
 be met).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to phencyclidines is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If a phencyclidine intoxication or
 another phencyclidine-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
 below for phencyclidine use disorder. Instead, the comorbid phencyclidine use
 disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the phencyclidine-induced disorder code
 (see the coding note for phencyclidine intoxication or a specific phencyclidine
induced mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid phencyclidine-induced
 psychotic disorder, only the phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder code is given,
 with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid phencyclidine use disorder is
 mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild phencyclidine use disorder with
 phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder or F16.259 for a moderate or severe
 phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
 F16.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F16.11 Mild, In early remission
 F16.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F16.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F16.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F16.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F16.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F16.21 Severe, In early remission
 F16.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Diagnostic Features
 The phencyclidines (or phencyclidine-like substances) include phencyclidine (e.g., PCP, “angel
 dust”) and less potent but similarly acting compounds such as ketamine,
 589
 cyclohexamine, and dizocilpine. These substances were first developed as dissociative
 anesthetics in the 1950s and became street drugs in the 1960s. They produce feelings of
 separation from mind and body (hence “dissociative”) in low doses, and at high doses, stupor
 and coma can result. These substances are most commonly smoked or taken orally, but they may
 also be snorted or injected. Although the primary psychoactive effects of phencyclidine last for a
 few hours, the total elimination rate of this drug from the body typically extends 8 days or
 longer. The hallucinogenic effects in vulnerable individuals may last for weeks and may
 precipitate a persistent psychotic episode resembling schizophrenia. Ketamine has been observed
 to have utility in the treatment of major depressive disorder. Withdrawal symptoms have not
 been clearly established in humans, and therefore the withdrawal criterion is not included in the
 diagnosis of phencyclidine use disorder.
 Associated Features
 Phencyclidine may be detected in urine for up to 8 days or even longer at very high doses. In
 addition to laboratory tests to detect its presence, characteristic symptoms resulting from
 intoxication with phencyclidine or related substances may aid in its diagnosis. Phencyclidine is
 likely to produce dissociative symptoms, analgesia, nystagmus, risk of hypertension/hypotension
 and shock, euphoria, visual/auditory hallucinations, derealization, and unusual thought content.
Violent behavior can also occur with phencyclidine use, as intoxicated individuals may believe
 that they are being attacked.
 Prevalence
 Data on the prevalence of phencyclidine use disorder are not available, but rates appear to be low
 (based on rates of the overall category of hallucinogen use disorder, which includes
 phencyclidine, of about 0.1% among individuals age 12 and older in the United States).
 Furthermore, among U.S. substance use treatment facility admissions, only 0.3% of the admitted
 individuals endorsed phencyclidine as their primary drug.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 In a general population study in Australia, ketamine users were more likely to be men and to
 have consumed more than 11 standard drinks per day.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The gender ratio for phencyclidine use disorder is not known, but among U.S. substance use
 treatment facility admissions endorsing phencyclidine as the primary drug, 62% were men.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidine is present in the urine in intoxicated
 individuals up to 8 days after ingestion. The individual’s history along with certain physical
 signs (e.g., nystagmus, analgesia, prominent hypertension) may aid in distinguishing the
 phencyclidine clinical picture from that of other hallucinogens.
 Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Use Disorder
 In individuals with phencyclidine use disorder, there may be physical evidence of injuries from
 accidents, fights, and falls. Chronic use of phencyclidine can lead to acute and persistent
 cognitive impairment; urinary tract and intestinal symptoms; abdominal pain, chest pain,
 palpitations, and tachycardia; respiratory depression; sleep disorders; and depression.
 590
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other substance use disorders.
 Distinguishing the effects of phencyclidine from those of other
 substances may be important, because phencyclidine can be an additive to other substances (e.g.,
 cannabis, cocaine).
 Phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-induced mental disorders.
 Phencyclidine use disorder is
 differentiated from phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-induced mental disorders (e.g.,
 phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder) in that phencyclidine use disorder describes a
 problematic pattern of phencyclidine use that involves impaired control over phencyclidine use,
 social impairment attributable to phencyclidine use, risky phencyclidine use (e.g., driving while
 intoxicated), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance), whereas
Independent mental disorders.
 phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine
induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with phencyclidine use disorder. In
 such cases, a diagnosis of phencyclidine intoxication or a phencyclidine-induced mental disorder
 should be given in addition to a diagnosis of phencyclidine use disorder, the presence of which is
 indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Some of the effects of phencyclidine use may resemble symptoms
 of independent mental disorders, such as psychosis (schizophrenia); low mood (major depressive
 disorder); and violent, aggressive behaviors (conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder).
 Discerning whether these behaviors occurred before the intake of the drug is important in the
 differentiation of acute drug effects from a preexisting mental disorder.
 Comorbidity
 Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial personality disorder may be associated with
 phencyclidine use. Other substance use disorders, especially alcohol, cocaine, and amphetamine
 use disorders, are common among those with phencyclidine use disorder.