 Phencyclidine Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent use of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance).
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral changes (e.g., belligerence,
assaultiveness, impulsiveness, unpredictability, psychomotor agitation, impaired
 judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, phencyclidine use.
 595
 C. Within 1 hour, two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
 Note: When the drug is smoked, “snorted,” or used intravenously, the onset may
 be particularly rapid.
 1. Vertical or horizontal nystagmus.
 2. Hypertension or tachycardia.
 3. Numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain.
 4. Ataxia.
 5. Dysarthria.
 6. Muscle rigidity.
 7. Seizures or coma.
 8. Hyperacusis.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid
 phencyclidine use disorder. If a mild phencyclidine use disorder is comorbid, the
 ICD-10-CM code is F16.120, and if a moderate or severe phencyclidine use disorder
 is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.220. If there is no comorbid phencyclidine
 use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.920.
 Note: In addition to the section “Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine
 Intoxication,” see the corresponding section in Phencyclidine Use Disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 Phencyclidine intoxication reflects the clinically significant behavioral changes that occur shortly
 after ingestion of this substance (or a pharmacologically similar substance). The most common
 clinical presentations of phencyclidine intoxication include disorientation; confusion without
 hallucinations; nystagmus; numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain; ataxia; dysarthria;
 muscle rigidity; hyperacusis; and coma of varying severity. Other clinically significant
 behavioral changes associated with phencyclidine intoxication include violent behavior, extreme
 agitation, persecutory delusions, euphoria, retrograde amnesia, and hypertension.
 Prevalence
 Use of phencyclidine or related substances (e.g., ketamine) may be taken as an estimate of the
 prevalence of intoxication. Phencyclidine use is rare, with < 0.1% of the U.S. population age 12
 and older reporting past 12-month use in 2018. In surveys of U.S. students and young adults
 followed up from high school, past 12-month prevalence of ketamine use, which is assessed
separately from other substances, was estimated at about 1.2% among 12th graders and 0.5%
 among young adults, ages 19–28 years.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidine is detectable in urine for up to 8 days
 following use, although the levels are only weakly associated with an individual’s clinical
 presentation and may therefore not be useful for case management. Creatine phosphokinase and
 aspartate aminotransferase levels may be elevated.
 Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Intoxication
 Phencyclidine intoxication produces extensive cardiovascular and neurological (e.g., seizures,
 dystonias, dyskinesias, catalepsy, hypothermia or hyperthermia) toxicity.
 596
 Differential Diagnosis
 In particular, in the absence of intact reality testing (i.e., without insight that the perceptual
 abnormalities are drug induced), an additional diagnosis of phencyclidine-induced psychotic
 disorder should be considered.
 Other substance intoxication.
 Phencyclidine intoxication should be differentiated from intoxication
 due to other substances, including other hallucinogens; amphetamine, cocaine, or other
 stimulants; and anticholinergics, as well as withdrawal from benzodiazepines. Nystagmus and
 bizarre and violent behavior may distinguish intoxication due to phencyclidine from that due to
 other substances. Toxicological tests may be useful in making this distinction. However, the
 weak correlation between quantitative toxicology levels of phencyclidine and clinical
 presentation may diminish the utility of the laboratory findings for patient management.
 Phencyclidine-induced mental disorders.
 Phencyclidine 
intoxication 
is 
distinguished 
from
 phencyclidine-induced mental disorders (e.g., phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with
 onset during intoxication) because the symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in the latter disorders
 are in excess of those usually associated with phencyclidine intoxication, predominate in the
 clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Other medical conditions.
 Medical conditions to be considered include certain metabolic disorders
 like hypoglycemia and hyponatremia, central nervous system tumors, seizure disorders, sepsis,
 neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and vascular insults.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of phencyclidine intoxication with phencyclidine use disorder, see
 “Comorbidity” under Phencyclidine Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions
 that are likely to be encountered.