 Comorbidity
 Bipolar II disorder is more often than not associated with one or more co-occurring mental
 disorders, with anxiety disorders being the most common. Approximately 60% of individuals
 with bipolar II disorder have three or more co-occurring mental disorders; 75% have an anxiety
 disorder, most commonly social anxiety (38%), specific phobia (36%), and generalized anxiety
 (30%). Lifetime prevalence of comorbid anxiety disorder does not differ between bipolar I and
 bipolar II disorders but is associated with a worse course of illness. Children and adolescents
 with bipolar II disorder have a higher rate of co-occurring anxiety disorders compared to those
 with bipolar I disorder, and the anxiety disorder most often predates the bipolar disorder.
 Anxiety and substance use disorders occur in individuals with bipolar II disorder at a higher
 rate than in the general population. It should be noted that co-occurring anxiety and substance
 use disorder do not seem to follow a course of illness that is truly independent from that of
 bipolar II disorder, but rather have strong associations with mood states. For example, anxiety
 disorders tend to associate most with depressive symptoms, and substance use disorders are
 moderately associated with hypomanic symptoms.
 The prevalence of substance use disorders appears to be similar between bipolar I and bipolar
 II disorders, most commonly alcohol use (42%) and cannabis use (20%) disorders. Sociocultural
 factors influence the pattern of comorbid conditions in bipolar II disorder. For example,
 countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may have a lower
 prevalence of substance use comorbidity.
 Individuals with bipolar II disorder appear to have lower rates of comorbid posttraumatic
F34.0
 stress disorder compared to individuals with bipolar I disorder.
 Approximately 14% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have at least one lifetime eating
 disorder, with binge-eating disorder being more common than bulimia nervosa and anorexia
 nervosa.
 Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder are common in women with
 bipolar disorder, especially in those with bipolar II disorder. Among women who have
 premenstrual syndrome and/or premenstrual dysphoric disorder, bipolar mood symptoms and
 lability may be more severe.
 Individuals with bipolar II disorder also have comorbid medical conditions, which have the
 potential to substantially complicate course and prognosis. These include cardiovascular disease,
 migraine, and autoimmune disorders.