Functional Neurological Symptom Disorder (Conversion
 Disorder)
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory function.
 B. Clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility between the symptom and
 recognized neurological or medical conditions.
 C. The symptom or deficit is not better explained by another medical or mental
 disorder.
 D. The symptom or deficit causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or warrants medical
 evaluation.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the symptom type (see below).
 Specify symptom type:
 F44.4 With weakness or paralysis
 F44.4 With abnormal movement (e.g., tremor, dystonia, myoclonus, gait
 disorder)
 F44.4 With swallowing symptoms
 F44.4 With speech symptom (e.g., dysphonia, slurred speech)
 F44.5 With attacks or seizures
 F44.6 With anesthesia or sensory loss
 F44.6 With special sensory symptom (e.g., visual, olfactory, or hearing
 disturbance)
 F44.7 With mixed symptoms
 Specify if:
 Acute episode: Symptoms present for less than 6 months.
 Persistent: Symptoms occurring for 6 months or more.
 361
 Specify if:
 With psychological stressor (specify stressor)
 Without psychological stressor
 Diagnostic Features
 In functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder), there may be one or more
 neurological symptoms of various types. Motor symptoms include weakness or paralysis;
 abnormal movements, such as tremor, jerks, or dystonic movements; and gait abnormalities.
 Sensory symptoms include altered, reduced, or absent skin sensation, vision, or hearing.
 Episodes of apparent unresponsiveness with or without limb movements may resemble epileptic
 seizures, syncope, or coma (also called dissociative, psychogenic, or nonepileptic seizures or
 attacks). Other symptoms include reduced or absent speech volume (dysphonia/aphonia); altered
 speech articulation, prosody, or fluency; a sensation of a lump in the throat (globus); and
 diplopia. This disorder has been called “conversion disorder” in prior editions of DSM as well as
 in much of the psychiatric research literature. The term “conversion” originated in
 psychoanalytic theory, which proposes that unconscious psychic conflict is “converted” into
 physical symptoms.
 The diagnosis rests on clinical findings that show clear evidence of incompatibility with
 recognized neurological disease. These should usually be elicited and interpreted in the context
 of the whole clinical picture by a health care professional with expertise in the diagnosis of
neurological conditions. The diagnosis is not one of exclusion and can be made in individuals
 who also have neurological diseases like epilepsy or multiple sclerosis. The diagnosis should not
 be made simply because results from investigations are normal or because the symptom is
 “bizarre.” Internal inconsistency during examination is one way to demonstrate incompatibility
 (i.e., demonstrating that physical signs elicited through one examination method are no longer
 present when tested a different way). There are dozens of examples of such “positive”
 examination findings. Examples of examination findings that indicate incompatibility with
 recognized neurological disease include the following:
 For functional limb weakness or paralysis: Hoover’s sign, in which weakness of hip extension returns to normal strength
 with contralateral hip flexion against resistance; the hip abductor sign, in which weakness of thigh abduction returns to
 normal with contralateral hip abduction against resistance; or a discrepancy between on-the-bed performance (e.g., weakness
 of ankle plantar flexion) compared with another task (e.g., ability to walk on tiptoes).
 For functional tremor: the tremor entrainment test, in which a tremor changes when the individual is distracted by copying
 the examiner in making a rhythmical movement with the contralateral hand or foot. The test is positive when the tremor
 “entrains” the rhythm of the unaffected hand or foot, the tremor is suppressed, or the individual cannot copy simple
 rhythmical movements. Other features of functional limb tremor include variability in frequency or direction of the tremor.
 For functional dystonia: individuals typically present with fixed inverted position of the ankle, a clenched fist, or unilateral
 contraction of platysma, often with sudden onset.
 For attacks resembling epileptic seizures or syncope (also called functional or dissociative [nonepileptic] seizures): features
 suggestive of functional neurological symptom disorder include persistent eye closure sometimes with resistance to opening,
 bilateral motor movements with preserved awareness, or a duration longer than 5 minutes. Clinical features usually need to
 be combined and may be supported with a normal simultaneous ictal electroencephalogram (although this alone does not
 exclude all forms of epilepsy or syncope.
 362
 For functional speech symptoms: internal inconsistencies in speech articulation and phonation.
 For functional visual symptoms: a tubular visual field (i.e., tunnel vision) and tests that indicate internal inconsistency in
 visual acuity, such as the “fogging test” (i.e., while the individual views the eye chart with both eyes open, the “good” eye is
 subtly fogged so that any useful binocular vision must be a result of “bad” eye function).
 It is important to note that the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder should
 be based on the overall clinical picture and not on a single clinical finding.
 Associated Features
 Several associated features can support the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom
 disorder, although none are specific. There may be a history of other functional somatic
 symptoms or disorders, especially involving pain and fatigue. Onset may be associated with
 stress or trauma, either psychological or physical in nature. The potential etiological relevance of
 this stress or trauma may be suggested by a close temporal relationship. However, while
 assessment for stress and trauma is important, it may be absent in up to 50% of individuals, and
 the diagnosis should not be withheld if none is found.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder is often associated with dissociative symptoms,
such as depersonalization, derealization, and dissociative amnesia, particularly at symptom onset
 or during attacks.
 The phenomenon of la belle indifférence (i.e., lack of concern about the nature or
 implications of the symptom) has been associated with functional neurological symptom
 disorder, but it is not specific and should not be used to make the diagnosis. Similarly, the
 concept of secondary gain (i.e., when individuals derive external benefits such as money or
 release from responsibilities) is also not specific to functional neurological symptom disorder.
 Prevalence
 Transient functional neurological symptoms are common, but the precise prevalence of the
 disorder is unknown. Based on research in the United States and northern Europe, the incidence
 of individual persistent functional neurological symptoms is estimated to be 4–12/100,000 per
 year. Prevalence in specialty clinics appears to be higher, although data are limited. For example,
 5% of outpatients ages 9–17 in a Japanese psychiatric clinic and 6% of adult and adolescent
 admissions to an inpatient psychiatric hospital in Oman received a diagnosis consistent with
 functional neurological symptom disorder. In neurology clinics, around 5%–15% of individuals
 have a diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder in studies from Scotland and
 Australia.
 Development and Course
 Onset has been reported throughout the life course. The mean onset of nonepileptic attacks peaks
 at ages 20–29 years, and motor symptoms have their mean onset at ages 30–39 years. The
 symptoms can be transient or persistent. The prognosis may be better in younger children than in
 adolescents and adults.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Maladaptive personality traits, especially emotional instability, are commonly
 associated with functional neurological symptom disorder.
 Environmental.
 There may be a history of childhood abuse and neglect. Stressful life events
 including physical injury are common but not universal triggering factors.
 363
 Genetic and physiological.
 The presence of neurological disease that causes similar symptoms is a
 risk factor (e.g., around one in five individuals with functional [nonepileptic] seizures also have
 epilepsy).
 Course modifiers.
 Short duration of symptoms and agreement with the diagnosis are positive
 prognostic factors. Maladaptive personality traits, the presence of comorbid physical disease, and
 the receipt of disability benefits appear to be negative prognostic factors.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Episodes of unresponsiveness (including seizures) and motor symptoms are the most common
 functional neurological symptoms across cultural contexts. High comorbidity between functional
neurological and dissociative symptoms is common cross-culturally, especially in individuals
 with nonepileptic seizures. Changes resembling functional neurological (and dissociative)
 symptoms are common in certain culturally sanctioned rituals. If the symptoms are fully
 explained within the particular cultural context and do not result in clinically significant distress
 or disability, then the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder is not made.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Functional neurological symptom disorder is two to three times more common in women for
 most symptom presentations. One large clinical study found higher rates of cognitive impairment
 and weakness in men and increased past sexual and physical trauma in women.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Cohort studies of functional neurological symptom disorder mostly show higher rates of suicidal
 thoughts and attempts. Individuals with functional symptoms in a neurology clinic have a higher
 rate of suicidal thoughts than individuals with recognized neurological disease. A study in
 Turkey of 100 consecutive psychiatric outpatients with functional neurological symptom
 disorder found that a history of suicide attempt was associated with risky use of alcohol, a
 history of childhood maltreatment, and greater severity of dissociative symptoms as compared
 with those who did not attempt suicide.
 Functional Consequences of Functional Neurological Symptom
 Disorder
 Individuals with functional neurological symptom disorder may have substantial physical
 disability. The severity of disability can be similar to that experienced by individuals with
 comparable recognized medical conditions.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Recognized neurological disease.
 The main differential diagnosis is recognized neurological
 disease that might better explain the symptoms. After a thorough neurological assessment, an
 unexpected neurological disease cause for the symptoms is rarely found at follow-up. However,
 reassessment may be required if the symptoms appear to be progressive. Functional neurological
 symptom disorder commonly coexists with recognized neurological disease and may be part of
 the prodromal state of some progressive neurological diseases.
 Somatic symptom disorder.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder may be diagnosed in
 addition to somatic symptom disorder. Most of the somatic symptoms
 364
 encountered in somatic symptom disorder cannot be demonstrated to be clearly incompatible
 with recognized neurological or medical disease, whereas in functional neurological symptom
 disorder, such incompatibility is required for the diagnosis.
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder describes genuinely
 experienced symptoms that are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned). However, definite
Dissociative disorders.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 Depressive disorders.
 Panic disorder.
 F54
 evidence of feigning (e.g., marked discrepancy between reported and observed activities of daily
 living) would suggest malingering if the individual’s apparent aim is to obtain an obvious
 external reward, or factitious disorder in the absence of such reward.
 Dissociative symptoms are common in individuals with functional
 neurological symptom disorder. If both functional neurological symptom disorder and a
 dissociative disorder are present, both diagnoses should be made.
 Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are excessively concerned
 about a perceived defect in their physical appearance but do not complain of symptoms of
 sensory or motor functioning in the affected body part.
 In depressive disorders, individuals may report general heaviness of their
 limbs, whereas the weakness of functional neurological symptom disorder is more focal and
 prominent. Depressive disorders are also differentiated by the presence of core depressive
 symptoms.
 Episodic neurological symptoms (e.g., tremor and paresthesia) can occur in both
 functional neurological symptom disorder and panic attacks. In panic attacks, the neurological
 symptoms are typically associated with characteristic cardiorespiratory symptoms and retained
 awareness. Loss of awareness with amnesia for the attack occurs in functional seizures but not in
 panic attacks.
 Comorbidity
 Anxiety disorders, especially panic disorder, and depressive disorders commonly co-occur with
 functional neurological symptom disorder. Somatic symptom disorder may co-occur as well.
 Personality disorders are more common in individuals with functional neurological symptom
 disorder than in the general population. Neurological or other medical conditions commonly
 coexist with functional neurological symptom disorder as well.