 Illness Anxiety Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness.
 B. Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are only mild in intensity. If
 another medical condition is present or there is a high risk for developing a
 medical condition (e.g., strong family history is present), the preoccupation is
 clearly excessive or disproportionate.
 C. There is a high level of anxiety about health, and the individual is easily alarmed
 about personal health status.
 D. The individual performs excessive health-related behaviors (e.g., repeatedly
 checks his or her body for signs of illness) or exhibits maladaptive avoidance
 (e.g., avoids doctor appointments and hospitals).
 E. Illness preoccupation has been present for at least 6 months, but the specific
 illness that is feared may change over that period of time.
 F. The illness-related preoccupation is not better explained by another mental
 disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety
 disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or
 delusional disorder, somatic type.
 Specify whether:
Care-seeking type: Medical care, including physician visits or undergoing tests
 and procedures, is frequently used.
 Care-avoidant type: Medical care is rarely used.
 Diagnostic Features
 Most individuals who previously would have been diagnosed with hypochondriasis in DSM-IV
 (preoccupation with having a serious disease based on the individual’s misinterpretation of
 bodily symptoms) are now classified as having somatic symptom disorder; however, in one-third
 of cases, the diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder applies instead.
 Illness anxiety disorder entails a preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious,
 undiagnosed medical illness (Criterion A). Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are
 only mild in intensity (Criterion B). A thorough evaluation fails to identify a serious medical
 condition that accounts for the individual’s concerns. While the concern may be derived from a
 nonpathological physical sign or sensation, the individual’s distress emanates not primarily from
 the physical complaint itself but rather from his or her anxiety about the meaning, significance,
 or cause of the complaint (i.e., the suspected medical diagnosis). If a physical sign or symptom is
 present, it is often a normal physiological sensation (e.g., orthostatic dizziness), a benign and
 self-limited dysfunction (e.g., transient tinnitus), or a bodily discomfort not generally considered
 indicative of disease (e.g., belching). If a diagnosable medical condition is present, the
 individual’s anxiety and preoccupation are clearly excessive and disproportionate to the severity
 of the condition (Criterion B). Most empirical evidence and existing literature pertain to
 previously defined DSM hypochondriasis and health anxiety, and it is unclear to what extent and
 how precisely they apply to the description of this new diagnosis.
 The preoccupation with the idea that one is sick is accompanied by substantial anxiety about
 health and disease (Criterion C). Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are easily alarmed
 about illness, such as by hearing about someone else falling ill or reading a health-related news
 story. Their concerns about undiagnosed disease do not respond to appropriate medical
 reassurance, negative diagnostic tests, or benign course. The physician’s attempts at reassurance
 and symptom palliation generally do not alleviate the individual’s
 358
 concerns and may heighten them. Illness concerns assume a prominent place in the
 individual’s life, affecting daily activities, and may even result in invalidism. Illness becomes a
 central feature of the individual’s identity and self-image, a frequent topic of social discourse,
 and a characteristic response to stressful life events. Individuals with the disorder often examine
 themselves repeatedly (e.g., examining one’s throat in the mirror) (Criterion D). They research
 their suspected disease excessively (e.g., on the Internet) and repeatedly seek reassurance from
 family, friends, or physicians. This incessant worrying often becomes frustrating for othe rs and
 may result in considerable strain within the family. In some cases, the anxiety leads to
 maladaptive avoidance of situations (e.g., visiting sick family members) or activities (e.g.,
 exercise) that these individuals fear might jeopardize their health.
Associated Features
 Because they believe they are medically ill, individuals with illness anxiety disorder are
 encountered far more frequently in medical than in mental health settings. The majority of
 individuals with illness anxiety disorder have extensive yet unsatisfactory medical care. They
 generally have elevated rates of utilization of medical and mental health services compared with
 the general population. In a minority of cases of illness anxiety disorder, individuals are too
 anxious to seek medical attention and avoid medical health care.
 They often consult multiple physicians for the same problem and obtain repeatedly negative
 diagnostic test results. At times, medical attention leads to a paradoxical exacerbation of anxiety
 or to iatrogenic complications from diagnostic tests and procedures. Individuals with the disorder
 are generally dissatisfied with their medical care and find it unhelpful, often feeling they are not
 being taken seriously by physicians. At times, these concerns may be justified, since physicians
 sometimes are dismissive or respond with frustration or hostility. This response can occasionally
 result in a failure to diagnose a medical condition that is present.
 Prevalence
 Prevalence estimates of illness anxiety disorder are based on estimates of the DSM-III and DSM
IV diagnosis hypochondriasis and health anxiety. The 1- to 2-year prevalence of health anxiety
 and/or disease conviction in community surveys and population-based samples from high
income countries such as the United States and Germany ranges from 1.3% to 10%. In
 ambulatory medical populations, the 6-month/1-year prevalence rates are between 2.2% and 8%
 across a range of countries, with weighted mean prevalence rates of 3%. By contrast, in a study
 of patients in specialty clinics, about one-fifth of individuals reported illness anxiety. The
 prevalence of the disorder is similar in men and women.
 Development and Course
 The development and course of illness anxiety disorder are unclear. Illness anxiety disorder is
 generally thought to be a chronic, episodic, and relapsing condition with an age at onset in early
 and middle adulthood. The disorder is thought to be rare in children, although the onset of
 health-related anxieties can occur in childhood or adolescence. In some population-based
 samples, health-related anxiety increases with age, but in others, health anxiety peaks in middle
 age, before declining in older age. The ages of individuals with high health anxiety in medical
 settings do not appear to differ from those of other individuals in those settings. In older
 individuals, health-related anxiety often focuses on memory loss and sensory loss.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Illness anxiety disorder may sometimes be precipitated by a major life stress or a
 serious but ultimately benign threat to the individual’s health. A history of
 359
 childhood abuse or of a serious childhood illness, serious illness in a parent, or death of an ill
 parent during childhood may predispose to development of the disorder in adulthood.
Course modifiers.
 Approximately one-third to one-half of individuals with illness anxiety
 disorder have a transient form, which is associated with less psychiatric comorbidity, more
 medical comorbidity, and less severe illness anxiety disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The diagnosis should be made with caution in individuals whose ideas about disease are
 congruent with widely held cultural beliefs. The prevalence appears to be similar across different
 countries, although little is known about the cross-cultural variation in phenomenology.
 Functional Consequences of Illness Anxiety Disorder
 Illness anxiety disorder causes substantial role impairment and decrements in physical function
 and health-related quality of life. Health concerns often interfere with interpersonal relationships,
 disrupt family life, and damage occupational performance.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 The first differential diagnostic consideration is an underlying medical
 condition, including neurological or endocrine conditions, occult malignancies, and other
 diseases that affect multiple body systems. The presence of a medical condition does not rule out
 the possibility of coexisting illness anxiety disorder. If a medical condition is present, the health
related anxiety and disease concerns are clearly disproportionate to its seriousness. Transient
 preoccupations related to a medical condition do not constitute illness anxiety disorder.
 Adjustment disorders.
 Health-related anxiety is a normal response to serious illness and is not a
 mental disorder. Such nonpathological health anxiety is clearly related to the medical condition
 and is typically time-limited. If the health anxiety is severe enough to cause clinically significant
 distress or impairment in one or more important areas of functioning, an adjustment disorder
 may be diagnosed. However, if disproportionate health-related anxiety persists for longer than 6
 months, a diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder may apply.
 Somatic symptom disorder.
 Both somatic symptom disorder and illness anxiety disorder may be
 characterized by a high level of anxiety about health and excessive health-related behaviors.
 They are differentiated by the fact that somatic symptom disorder requires the presence of
 somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life, whereas in
 illness anxiety disorder, somatic symptoms either are not present or, if present, are only mild in
 intensity.
 Anxiety disorders.
 In generalized anxiety disorder, individuals worry about multiple events,
 situations, or activities, only one of which may involve health. In panic disorder, the individual
 may be concerned that the panic attacks reflect the presence of a medical illness; however,
 although these individuals may have health anxiety, their anxiety is typically very acute and
 episodic. In illness anxiety disorder, the health anxiety and fears are more persistent and
 enduring. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may experience panic attacks that are
 triggered by their illness concerns.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have
 intrusive thoughts about having a disease and also may have associated compulsive behaviors
Major depressive disorder.
 Psychotic disorders.
 (e.g., seeking reassurance). However, in illness anxiety disorder, the preoccupations are usually
 focused on having a disease, whereas in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), the thoughts are
 intrusive and are usually focused on fears of getting a disease in the future. Most individuals with
 OCD have obsessions or compulsions
 360
 involving other concerns in addition to fears about contracting disease. In body dysmorphic
 disorder, concerns are limited to the individual’s physical appearance, which is viewed as
 defective or flawed.
 Some individuals with a major depressive episode ruminate about their
 health and worry excessively about illness. A separate diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is not
 made if these concerns occur only during major depressive episodes. However, if excessive
 illness worry persists after remission of an episode of major depressive disorder, the diagnosis of
 illness anxiety disorder should be considered.
 Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are not delusional and can
 acknowledge the possibility that the feared disease is not present. Their ideas do not attain the
 rigidity and intensity seen in the somatic delusions occurring in psychotic disorders (e.g.,
 schizophrenia; delusional disorder, somatic type; major depressive disorder, with psychotic
 features). True somatic delusions are generally more bizarre (e.g., that an organ is rotting or
 dead) than the concerns seen in illness anxiety disorder. The concerns seen in illness anxiety
 disorder, though not founded in reality, are plausible.
 Comorbidity
 Illness anxiety disorder co-occurs with anxiety disorders (in particular, generalized anxiety
 disorder and panic disorder), OCD, and depressive disorders. Approximately two-thirds of
 individuals with illness anxiety disorder are likely to have at least one other comorbid major
 mental disorder. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have an elevated risk for
 personality disorders.