Factitious Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self
 A. Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of
 injury or disease, associated with identified deception.
 B. The individual presents himself or herself to others as ill, impaired, or injured.
 C. The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external
 rewards.
 D. The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
 delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.
 Specify:
 Single episode
 Recurrent episodes (two or more events of falsification of illness and/or
 induction of injury)
 Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another (Previously Factitious
 Disorder by Proxy)
 A. Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of
 injury or disease, in another, associated with identified deception.
 B. The individual presents another individual (victim) to others as ill, impaired, or
 injured.
 C. The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external
 rewards.
 D. The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
 delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.
 Note: The perpetrator, not the victim, receives this diagnosis.
 Specify:
 Single episode
 Recurrent episodes (two or more events of falsification of illness and/or
 induction of injury)
 368
 Recording Procedures
 When an individual falsifies illness in another (e.g., children, adults, pets), the diagnosis is
 factitious disorder imposed on another. The perpetrator, not the victim, is given the diagnosis.
The victim may be given an abuse diagnosis (e.g., T74.12X; see the chapter “Other Conditions
 That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”). If an individual with factitious disorder imposed on
 another has also deceptively represented his or her own illness or injury, both factitious disorder
 imposed on self and on another can be diagnosed.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of factitious disorder is the falsification of medical or psychological signs
 and symptoms in the individual or others that are associated with the identified deception.
 Individuals with factitious disorder can also seek treatment for themselves or another following
 induction of injury or disease. The diagnosis requires demonstrating that the individual is taking
 surreptitious actions to misrepresent, simulate, or cause signs or symptoms of illness or injury
 even in the absence of obvious external rewards. The diagnosis of factitious disorder emphasizes
 the objective identification of falsification of signs and symptoms of illness and not the
 individual motivations of the falsifier. Methods of illness falsification can include exaggeration,
 fabrication, simulation, and induction. While a preexisting medical condition may be present, the
 deceptive behavior or induction of injury associated with deception causes others to view such
 individuals (or, in the case of factitious disorder imposed on another, the victim) as more ill or
 impaired, and this can lead to excessive clinical intervention. Individuals with factitious disorder
 might, for example, report feelings of depression and suicidal thoughts or behavior following the
 death of a spouse despite the death not being true or the individual’s not having a spouse;
 deceptively report episodes of neurological symptoms (e.g., seizures, dizziness, or blacking out);
 manipulate a laboratory test (e.g., by adding blood to urine) to falsely indicate an abnormality;
 falsify medical records to indicate an illness; ingest a substance (e.g., insulin or warfarin) to
 induce an abnormal laboratory result or illness; or physically injure themselves or induce illness
 in themselves or another (e.g., by injecting fecal material to produce an abscess or to induce
 sepsis). Although individuals with factitious disorder most often present to health care
 professionals for treatment of their factitious symptoms, some individuals with factitious
 disorder choose to mislead community members in person or online about illness or injury
 without necessarily engaging health care professionals.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with factitious disorder imposed on self or factitious disorder imposed on another are
 at risk for experiencing great psychological distress or functional impairment by causing harm to
 themselves and others. Family, friends, faith leaders, and health care professionals are also often
 adversely affected by their behavior (e.g., devoted time, attention, and resources to provide
 medical care and emotional support to the falsifier). Individuals with factitious disorder imposed
 on another sometimes falsely allege the presence of educational deficits or disabilities in their
 children for which they demand special attention, often at considerable inconvenience to
 education professionals.
 Whereas some aspects of factitious disorders might represent criminal behavior (e.g.,
 factitious disorder imposed on another, in which the parent’s actions represent abuse and
 maltreatment of a child), such criminal behavior and mental illness are not mutually exclusive.
 Moreover, such behaviors, including the induction of injury or disease, are associated with
 deception.
Prevalence
 The prevalence of factitious disorder is unknown, likely because of the role of deception in this
 population. Further complicating efforts at determining prevalence is the fact that health care
 professionals infrequently record the diagnosis, even in recognized cases.
 369
 Based on a study of general hospital inpatients in the United States referred for psychiatric
 consultation, it is estimated that almost 1% have presentations that meet the criteria for factitious
 disorder. Factitious disorder imposed on self or another appears to be encountered more
 frequently in tertiary care settings than at primary care sites.
 Development and Course
 The course of factitious disorder is usually one of intermittent episodes. Single episodes and
 episodes that are characterized as persistent and unremitting are both less common. Onset is
 usually in early adulthood, often after hospitalization for a medical condition or a mental
 disorder. When imposed on another, the disorder may begin after hospitalization of the
 individual’s child or other dependent. In individuals with recurrent episodes of falsification of
 signs and symptoms of illness and/or induction of injury, this pattern of successive deceptive
 contact with medical personnel, including hospitalizations, may become lifelong.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 While the prevalence is not known, a pooled analysis of all case series and studies finds that two
thirds of individuals with factitious disorder are women and one-third are men.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Deception to avoid legal liability.
 Caregivers who lie about abuse injuries in dependents solely to
 protect themselves from liability are not diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on another
 because protection from liability is an external reward (Criterion C, the deceptive behavior is
 evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards). Such caregivers who, upon
 observation, analysis of medical records, and/or interviews with others, are found to lie more
 extensively than needed for immediate self-protection are diagnosed with factitious disorder
 imposed on another.
 Somatic symptom and related disorders.
 In somatic symptom disorder and the care-seeking type of
 illness anxiety disorder, there may be excessive attention and treatment seeking for perceived
 medical concerns, but there is no evidence that the individual is providing false information or
 behaving deceptively.
 Malingering.
 Malingering is differentiated from factitious disorder by the intentional reporting of
 symptoms for personal gain (e.g., money, time off work). In contrast, the diagnosis of factitious
 disorder requires that the illness falsification is not fully accounted for by external rewards.
 Factitious disorder and malingering are not mutually exclusive, however. The motives in any
 single case might be multiple and shifting depending on the circumstances and reactions of
 others.
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 Borderline personality disorder.
 Medical condition or mental disorder not associated with intentional symptom falsification.
 Functional neurological symptom
 disorder is characterized by neurological symptoms that are inconsistent with neurological
 pathophysiology. Factitious disorder with neurological symptoms is distinguished from
 functional neurological symptom disorder by evidence of deceptive falsification of symptoms.
 Deliberate physical self-harm in the absence of suicidal intent can
 also occur in association with other mental disorders such as borderline personality disorder.
 Factitious disorder requires that the induction of injury occur in association with deception.
 Presentation
 of signs and symptoms of illness that do not conform to an identifiable medical condition or
 mental disorder increases the likelihood of the presence of a factitious disorder. However, the
 diagnosis of factitious disorder does not exclude the
 370
 presence of a true medical condition or mental disorder, as comorbid illness often occurs in the
 individual along with factitious disorder. For example, individuals who might manipulate blood
 sugar levels to produce symptoms may also have diabetes.