Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical
 Conditions
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A medical symptom or condition (other than a mental disorder) is present.
 B. Psychological or behavioral factors adversely affect the medical condition in one
 of the following ways:
 1. The factors have influenced the course of the medical condition as shown by
 a close temporal association between the psychological factors and the
 development or exacerbation of, or delayed recovery from, the medical
 condition.
 2. The factors interfere with the treatment of the medical condition (e.g., poor
 adherence).
3. The factors constitute additional well-established health risks for the
 individual.
 365
 4. The factors influence the underlying pathophysiology, precipitating or
 exacerbating symptoms or necessitating medical attention.
 C. The psychological and behavioral factors in Criterion B are not better explained
 by another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder, major depressive disorder,
 posttraumatic stress disorder).
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Increases medical risk (e.g., inconsistent adherence with antihypertension
 treatment).
 Moderate: Aggravates underlying medical condition (e.g., anxiety aggravating
 asthma).
 Severe: Results in medical hospitalization or emergency room visit.
 Extreme: Results in severe, life-threatening risk (e.g., ignoring heart attack
 symptoms).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is the presence
 of one or more clinically significant psychological or behavioral factors that adversely affect a
 medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability (Criterion B). These
 factors can adversely affect the medical condition by influencing its course or treatment, by
 constituting an additional well-established health risk factor, or by influencing the underlying
 pathophysiology to precipitate or exacerbate symptoms or to necessitate medical attention.
 Psychological or behavioral factors include psychological distress, patterns of interpersonal
 interaction, coping styles, and maladaptive health behaviors, such as denial of symptoms or poor
 adherence to medical recommendations. Common clinical examples are anxiety-exacerbating
 asthma, denial of need for treatment for acute chest pain, and manipulation of insulin by an
 individual with diabetes wishing to lose weight. Many different psychological factors have been
 demonstrated to adversely influence medical conditions—for example, symptoms of depression
 or anxiety, stressful life events, relationship style, personality traits, and coping styles. The
 adverse effects can range from acute, with immediate medical consequences (e.g., Takotsubo
 cardiomyopathy), to chronic, occurring over a long period of time (e.g., chronic occupational
 stress increasing risk for hypertension). Affected medical conditions can be those with clear
 pathophysiology (e.g., diabetes, cancer, coronary disease), functional syndromes (e.g., migraine,
 irritable bowel syndrome, fibromyalgia), or idiopathic medical symptoms (e.g., pain, fatigue,
 dizziness).
 This diagnosis should be reserved for situations in which the effect of the psychological
 factor on the medical condition is evident and the psychological factor has clinically significant
 effects on the course or outcome of the medical condition. Abnormal psychological or behavioral
symptoms that develop in response to a medical condition are more properly coded as an
 adjustment disorder (a clinically significant psychological response to an identifiable stressor).
 There must be reasonable evidence to suggest an association between the psychological factors
 and the medical condition, although it may often not be possible to demonstrate direct causality
 or the mechanisms underlying the relationship.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is unclear. In U.S.
 private insurance billing data, it was a more common diagnosis than DSM-IV somatic symptom
 disorders.
 Development and Course
 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions can occur across the lifespan.
 Particularly with young children, corroborative history from parents or school can assist the
 366
 diagnostic evaluation. Some conditions are characteristic of particular life stages (e.g., in older
 individuals, the stress associated with acting as a caregiver for an ill spouse or partner).
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Many differences between cultural contexts may influence psychological factors and their effects
 on medical conditions, such as those in language and communication style, idioms of distress,
 explanatory models of illness, patterns of seeking health care, service availability and
 organization, doctor-patient relationships and other healing practices, family and gender roles,
 and attitudes toward pain and death. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions
 must be differentiated from culturally specific coping behaviors such as accessing faith, spiritual,
 or traditional healers or other variations in illness management that are acceptable within cultural
 contexts and represent an attempt to help heal the medical condition. These local practices may
 complement rather than obstruct evidence-based interventions. Use of alternative healing
 practices may delay use of medical services and affect outcomes, but when the intent of the
 healing practice is to address the problem in a culturally sanctioned way, these practices should
 not be pathologized as psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
 Functional Consequences of Psychological Factors Affecting Other
 Medical Conditions
 Psychological and behavioral factors have been demonstrated to affect the course of many
 medical diseases.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Mental disorder due to another medical condition.
 A temporal association between symptoms of a
 mental disorder and those of a medical condition is also characteristic of a mental disorder due to
 another medical condition, but the presumed causality is in the opposite direction. In a mental
disorder due to another medical condition, the medical condition is judged to be causing the
 mental disorder through a direct physiological mechanism. In psychological factors affecting
 other medical conditions, the psychological or behavioral factors are judged to affect the course
 of the medical condition.
 Adjustment disorders.
 Abnormal psychological or behavioral symptoms that develop in response
 to a medical condition are more properly coded as an adjustment disorder (a clinically significant
 psychological response to an identifiable stressor). For example, an individual with angina that is
 precipitated whenever he becomes enraged would be diagnosed as having psychological factors
 affecting other medical conditions, whereas an individual with angina who developed
 maladaptive anticipatory anxiety would be diagnosed as having an adjustment disorder with
 anxiety. In clinical practice, however, psychological factors and a medical condition are often
 mutually exacerbating (e.g., anxiety as both a precipitant and a consequence of angina), in which
 case the distinction is arbitrary. Other mental disorders frequently result in medical
 complications, most notably substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol use disorder, tobacco use
 disorder). If an individual has a coexisting major mental disorder that adversely affects or causes
 another medical condition, diagnoses of the mental disorder and the medical condition are
 usually sufficient. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is diagnosed when
 the psychological traits or behaviors do not meet criteria for a mental diagnosis.
 Somatic symptom disorder.
 Somatic symptom disorder is characterized by a combination of
 distressing somatic symptoms and excessive or maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in
 response to these symptoms or associated health concerns. The individual may or may not have a
 diagnosable medical condition. In contrast, in psychological factors
 367
 affecting other medical conditions, the psychological factors adversely affect a medical
 condition; the individual’s thoughts, feelings, and behavior are not necessarily excessive. The
 difference is one of emphasis, rather than a clear-cut distinction. In psychological factors
 affecting other medical conditions, the emphasis is on the exacerbation of the medical condition
 (e.g., an individual with angina that is precipitated whenever he becomes anxious). In somatic
 symptom disorder, the emphasis is on maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior (e.g., an
 individual with angina who worries constantly that she will have a heart attack, takes her blood
 pressure multiple times per day, and restricts her activities).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by high illness anxiety that is
 distressing and/or disruptive to daily life with minimal somatic symptoms. The focus of clinical
 concern is the individual’s worry about having a disease; in most cases, no serious disease is
 present. In psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, anxiety may be a relevant
 psychological factor affecting a medical condition, but the clinical concern is the adverse effects
 on the medical condition.
 Comorbidity
 By definition, the diagnosis of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions entails a
 relevant psychological or behavioral syndrome or trait and a comorbid medical condition.
