Somatic Symptom Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant
 disruption of daily life.
 B. Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or
 associated health concerns as manifested by at least one of the following:
 1. Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of one’s
 symptoms.
 2. Persistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms.
 3. Excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns.
 C. Although any one somatic symptom may not be continuously present, the state
 of being symptomatic is persistent (typically more than 6 months).
 Specify if:
 With predominant pain (previously pain disorder): This specifier is for
 individuals whose somatic symptoms predominantly involve pain.
Specify if:
 Persistent: A persistent course is characterized by severe symptoms, marked
 impairment, and long duration (more than 6 months).
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Only one of the symptoms specified in Criterion B is fulfilled.
 Moderate: Two or more of the symptoms specified in Criterion B are fulfilled.
 Severe: Two or more of the symptoms specified in Criterion B are fulfilled, plus
 there are multiple somatic complaints (or one very severe somatic symptom).
 Diagnostic Features
 Individuals with somatic symptom disorder typically have multiple, current, somatic symptoms
 that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life (Criterion A), although
 sometimes only one severe symptom, most commonly pain, is present. Symptoms may be
 specific (e.g., localized pain) or relatively nonspecific (e.g., fatigue). The symptoms sometimes
 represent normal bodily sensations or discomfort that does not generally signify serious disease.
 Somatic symptoms without an evident medical explanation are not sufficient to make this
 diagnosis. The individual’s suffering is authentic, whether or not it is medically explained.
 The symptoms may or may not be associated with another medical condition. The diagnoses
 of somatic symptom disorder and a concurrent medical illness are not mutually exclusive, and
 these frequently occur together. For example, an individual may become seriously disabled by
 symptoms of somatic symptom disorder after an uncomplicated myocardial infarction even if the
 myocardial infarction itself did not result in any disability. If another medical condition or high
 risk for developing one is present (e.g., strong family history), the thoughts, feelings, and
 behaviors associated with this condition are excessive (Criterion B).
 352
 Individuals with somatic symptom disorder tend to have very high levels of worry about
 illness (Criterion B). They appraise their bodily symptoms as unduly threatening, harmful, or
 troublesome and often think the worst about their health. Even when there is evidence to the
 contrary, some individuals still fear the medical seriousness of their symptoms. In severe somatic
 symptom disorder, health concerns may assume a central role in the individual’s life, becoming a
 feature of his or her identity and dominating interpersonal relationships.
 Individuals typically experience distress that is principally focused on somatic symptoms and
 their significance. When asked directly about their distress, some individuals describe it in
 relation to other aspects of their lives, while others deny any source of distress other than the
 somatic symptoms. Health-related quality of life is often impaired, both physically and mentally.
 The diagnosis can further be specified by stating whether complaints predominantly involve pain
 and/or if complaints are marked by a persistent course.
 Additionally, severity of somatic symptom disorder can be specified by the number of
 fulfilled B criteria. Mild forms of somatic symptom disorder (one symptom as specified in
 Criterion B is fulfilled) are more prevalent, while moderate (two or more B criteria are present)
 and severe cases (two or more symptoms as specified in Criterion B are fulfilled in combination
with multiple somatic complaints or one very severe somatic symptom) are marked by higher
 levels of impairment. In severe somatic symptom disorder, the impairment is marked, and when
 persistent, the disorder can lead to invalidism.
 There is often a high level of medical care utilization, which rarely alleviates the individual’s
 concerns. Consequently, the individual may seek care from multiple doctors for the same
 symptoms. These individuals often seem unresponsive to medical interventions, and new
 interventions may only exacerbate the presenting symptoms. Some individuals with the disorder
 seem unusually sensitive to medication side effects. Some feel that their medical assessment and
 treatment have been inadequate.
 The criteria for somatic symptom disorder appear suitable for use in children and
 adolescents, but they have been less studied in youth than among adults.
 Associated Features
 Cognitive features include attention focused on somatic symptoms, attribution of normal bodily
 sensations to physical illness (possibly with catastrophic interpretations), worry about illness, a
 self-concept of bodily weakness, and intolerance of bodily complaints. Besides health anxiety,
 emotional features may include negative affectivity, desperation, and demoralization related to
 somatic symptoms. The relevant associated behavioral features may include repeated bodily
 checking for abnormalities, repeated seeking of medical help and reassurance, and avoidance of
 physical activity. These behavioral features are most pronounced in severe, persistent somatic
 symptom disorder. These features are usually associated with frequent requests for medical help
 for different somatic symptoms. This may lead to medical consultations in which individuals are
 so focused on their concerns about somatic symptom(s) that they cannot be redirected to other
 matters. Any reassurance by the doctor that the symptoms are not indicative of serious physical
 illness tends to be short-lived and/or is experienced by the individuals as the doctor not taking
 their symptoms with due seriousness. As the focus on somatic symptoms is a primary feature of
 the disorder, individuals with somatic symptom disorder typically present to general medical
 health services rather than mental health services. The suggestion of referral to a mental health
 specialist may be met with surprise or even frank refusal by individuals with somatic symptom
 disorder.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is unclear. Estimates about the prevalence of
 somatic symptom disorder come from the limited epidemiological literature on
 353
 DSM-IV-TR somatoform disorders. However, the prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is
 expected to be higher than that of the more restrictive DSM-IV-TR somatization disorder (<1%)
 but lower than that of undifferentiated somatoform disorder (approximately 19%). More recent
 population-based studies with a questionnaire-based strategy using DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for
 somatic symptom disorder in adult and adolescent samples report prevalence rates between 6.7%
 and 17.4%. Based on research conducted in Europe and North America, the prevalence of
 somatic symptom disorder in the general adult population can be approximated as 4%–6%.
Somatic symptom disorder has a higher frequency in primary care patients than in the general
 population. Based on reviews and meta-analyses of studies from multiple countries that had still
 used DSM-IV or ICD-10 criteria, a 12-month prevalence of somatic symptom disorder and
 related conditions in primary care patients between 10% and 20% appears plausible. Prevalence
 rates are higher in clinical settings that specialize in psychosomatic or functional disorders, with
 reported frequencies of somatic symptom disorder between 40% and 60%.
 Women tend to report more somatic symptoms than do men, and the prevalence of somatic
 symptom disorder is consequently likely to be higher in women.
 Development and Course
 In a study of Danish children ages 5–7 years, functional somatic symptoms were common health
 complaints, which for a significant minority (roughly one-fifth) of those with complaints were
 severe enough to cause distress, impairment, school absences, or medical help-seeking. Age at
 onset does not seem to affect the duration of untreated illness.
 The course of somatic symptom disorder is likely to be chronic and fluctuating and
 influenced by the number of symptoms, individual’s age, level of impairment, and any
 comorbidity. The course is also influenced by personality traits, with less harm avoidance and
 greater cooperativeness associated with a shorter time to remission.
 In children, the most common symptoms are recurrent abdominal pain, headache, fatigue,
 and nausea. A single prominent symptom is more common in children than in adults. When the
 diagnosis is being made in younger individuals, it is important to obtain patient, family, and
 other assessments (e.g., school) of symptom presentation. Patient and caregiver engagement
 during evaluation and management is fundamental because parents’ interpretation of and
 response to symptoms may determine the level of associated distress, the demands for medical
 investigations and interventions, and time away from school.
 In older individuals, pain localized in several body regions appears to be the most common
 symptom. Somatic symptoms and concurrent medical illnesses are common as multimorbidity
 increases with age. Prevalence rates of somatic symptom disorder seem to be stable until age 65
 years and might decrease thereafter. For making the diagnosis in older individuals, a focus on the
 requirement for excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or
 associated health concerns (Criterion B) is crucial. Somatic symptom disorder may be
 underdiagnosed in older adults either because certain somatic symptoms (e.g., pain, fatigue) are
 considered part of normal aging or because illness worry is considered “understandable” in older
 adults who have more general medical illnesses and medications than do younger people.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 The personality trait of negative affectivity (neuroticism) has been identified as
 an independent correlate/risk factor of a high number of somatic symptoms. Comorbid anxiety or
 depression is common and may exacerbate symptoms and impairment.
 354
 Environmental.
 Somatic symptom disorder is more frequent in individuals with few years of
 education and low socioeconomic status, and in those who have recently experienced stressful or
health-related life events. Early lifetime adversity such as childhood sexual abuse is also likely a
 risk factor for somatic symptom disorder in adults.
 Course modifiers.
 Persistent somatic symptoms are associated with demographic features
 (women, older age, fewer years of education, lower socioeconomic status, unemployment), a
 reported history of sexual abuse or other childhood adversity, concurrent chronic physical illness
 or mental disorder (depression, anxiety, persistent depressive disorder, panic), social stress, and
 reinforcing social factors such as illness benefits. Total somatic symptom severity is probably
 associated with female gender, anxiety, depression and general medical illness. Cognitive factors
 that affect clinical course include sensitization to pain, heightened attention to bodily sensations,
 and attribution of bodily symptoms to a possible medical illness rather than recognizing them as
 a normal phenomenon or psychological stress.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 High numbers of somatic symptoms are found in population-based and primary care studies
 around the world, with a similar pattern of the most commonly reported somatic symptoms,
 impairment, and treatment seeking. The relationship between number of somatic symptoms and
 illness worry is similar in different cultural contexts, and marked illness worry is associated with
 impairment and greater treatment seeking cross-culturally. In many cultural contexts, individuals
 with depression commonly present with somatic symptoms.
 Despite these similarities, there are differences in somatic symptoms across cultural contexts
 and ethnoracial groups. Sociocultural factors, particularly stigma related to mental disorders,
 may explain differences in somatic symptom reporting across cultural contexts. The description
 of somatic symptoms varies with linguistic and other local cultural factors. These somatic
 presentations have been described as “idioms of distress” because somatic symptoms may have
 special meanings and shape patient-clinician interactions in the particular cultural contexts. For
 example, sensations of heaviness, complaints of “gas,” too much heat in the body, or burning in
 the head are common in some cultures or ethnic groups but rare in others. Cultural explanations
 also vary, and somatic symptoms may be attributed variously to particular family, work (e.g.,
 burnout), or other environmental stresses; general medical illness; the suppression of feelings of
 anger and resentment; or certain culturally specific attributions, such as semen loss. Certain
 somatic symptoms may be part of specific explanatory models in a given cultural context; for
 example, traditional understandings of shenjing shuairuo in China link concepts of “weakness of
 nerves” (neurasthenia) and hot-cold imbalance with prominent symptoms such as fatigue and
 low energy. There may also be differences in medical treatment seeking and utilization of
 nonmedical, traditional, alternative and complementary healing practices among cultural groups,
 in addition to differences due to variable access to medical care services. Cultural beliefs,
 previous illnesses, insurance status, health literacy, and health care experiences can influence
 individuals’ perception of somatic symptoms and health care use. Seeking treatment for multiple
 somatic symptoms in general medical clinics is a worldwide phenomenon.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In population-based studies, women report more somatic symptoms than men, and in one study
 of primary care patients with chronic pain, women reported more severe somatic symptoms than
 men. While exposure to sexual trauma, intimate partner violence, and a childhood trauma history
is associated with increased somatic symptom expression in
 355
 both women and men, a childhood history of multiple adverse childhood experiences is
 especially likely to increase somatic symptom expression in women.
 In women, gender is associated with an increased likelihood of developing persistent
 symptoms of somatic symptom disorder. There appears to be no evidence that gender is
 associated with the duration of untreated illness and response to psychological or
 pharmacological treatment.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Somatic symptom disorder is associated with suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts. It is likely
 that suicidal thoughts and behaviors are partly explained by the diagnostic overlap and frequent
 comorbidity of somatic symptom disorder and depressive disorders. In addition, dysfunctional
 illness perceptions and the severity of somatic symptoms appear to be independently associated
 with an increased risk of suicidal ideation.
 Functional Consequences of Somatic Symptom Disorder
 The disorder is associated with marked impairment of health status and high psychological
 distress. Many individuals with severe somatic symptom disorder are likely to have impaired
 health status scores more than 2 standard deviations below population norms. Health status is
 particularly impaired in the presence of multiple or severe symptoms.
 Differential Diagnosis
 If the somatic symptoms are consistent with another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder), and
 the diagnostic criteria for that disorder are fulfilled, then that mental disorder should be
 considered as an alternative or additional diagnosis. If, as commonly occurs, the criteria for both
 somatic symptom disorder and another mental disorder diagnosis are fulfilled, then both should
 be diagnosed, as both may require treatment.
 Other medical conditions.
 The presence of somatic symptoms of unclear etiology is not in itself
 sufficient to make the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. The symptoms of many
 individuals with disorders like irritable bowel syndrome or fibromyalgia would not satisfy the
 criterion necessary to diagnose somatic symptom disorder (Criterion B). Conversely, the
 presence of somatic symptoms of an established medical condition (e.g., diabetes or heart
 disease) does not exclude the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder if the criteria are otherwise
 met. Factors that distinguish individuals with somatic symptom disorder from individuals with
 general medical conditions alone include the ineffectiveness of analgesics, a history of mental
 disorders, unclear provocative or palliative factors, persistence without cessation, and stress.
 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
 The diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder
 requires distressing or impairing somatic symptoms that may or may not be associated with
 another medical condition but must be accompanied by excessive or disproportionate thoughts,
 feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns. In contrast,
the diagnosis of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions requires the presence of
 a medical condition, as well as psychological factors that adversely affect its course or interfere
 with its treatment.
 Panic disorder.
 In panic disorder, somatic symptoms and anxiety about health tend to occur in
 acute episodes, whereas in somatic symptom disorder, anxiety and somatic symptoms are more
 persistent.
 Generalized anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry about multiple
 events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health. The main focus is not
 usually somatic symptoms or fear of illness as it is in somatic symptom disorder.
 356
 Depressive disorders.
 Depressive disorders are commonly accompanied by somatic symptoms
 such as fatigue, headaches, or joint, abdominal, or other pains. However, depressive disorders are
 differentiated from somatic symptom disorder by the requirement of the presence of depressed
 mood or, in the case of major depressive disorder, either depressed mood or decreased interest or
 pleasure in activities. In some cultural contexts, these core symptoms of depression may be
 initially denied or deemphasized by individuals whose presentations would otherwise meet
 criteria for a depressive disorder. Such individuals might instead emphasize somatic symptoms
 that may be idiomatic (e.g., heavy heart) and unfamiliar to clinicians.
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 If the individual has extensive worries about health but no or minimal
 somatic symptoms, it may be more appropriate to consider illness anxiety disorder.
 In functional neurological symptom
 Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 disorder, the presenting symptom is loss of function (e.g., of a limb), whereas in somatic
 symptom disorder, the focus is on the distress that particular symptoms cause. The features listed
 under Criterion B of somatic symptom disorder may be helpful in differentiating the two
 disorders.
 Delusional disorder.
 In somatic symptom disorder, the individual’s beliefs that somatic symptoms
 might reflect serious underlying physical illness are not held with delusional intensity.
 Nonetheless, the individual’s beliefs concerning the somatic symptoms can be firmly held. In
 contrast, in delusional disorder, somatic type, the individual’s conviction that the somatic
 symptoms are indicative of having a serious underlying illness is stronger than that found in
 somatic symptom disorder.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 In body dysmorphic disorder, the individual is excessively concerned
 about, and preoccupied by, a perceived defect in his or her physical appearance. In contrast, in
 somatic symptom disorder, the concern about somatic symptoms reflects fear of underlying
 illness, not of a defect in appearance.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 In somatic symptom disorder, the recurrent ideas about somatic
 symptoms or illness are less intrusive, and individuals with this disorder do not exhibit the
 associated repetitive behaviors aimed at reducing anxiety that occur in obsessive-compulsive
 disorder.
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 In factitious disorder and malingering, individuals present
 themselves as ill or impaired but have falsified presenting physical signs and symptoms with the
F45.21
 intent to deceive. In contrast, the symptoms of somatic symptom disorder are not simulated or
 self-induced, and these individuals suffer authentically and seriously from their somatic
 complaints.
 Comorbidity
 Somatic symptom disorder is associated with high rates of comorbidity with other mental
 disorders as well as general medical conditions. The most relevant co-occurring mental disorders
 are anxiety and depressive disorders, each of which occurs in up to 50% of cases of somatic
 symptom disorders and significantly contributes to overall functional impairment and poorer
 quality of life. Other mental disorders that have been found to co-occur with somatic symptom
 disorder are posttraumatic stress disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Other evidence
 indicates an association with sexual dysfunction in men.
 Elevated levels of the psychological features (Criterion B) of somatic symptom disorder have
 been found in several general medical conditions. When a concurrent general medical condition
 is present, the degree of impairment is more marked than would be expected from the physical
 illness alone. Moreover, somatization in medical illness has been shown to worsen disease and
 treatment outcomes, adherence, and quality of life and to increase health care utilization.
 357