Intellectual Developmental Disorder (Intellectual
Disability)
Diagnostic Criteria
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) is a disorder with onset
during the developmental period that includes both intellectual and adaptive
functioning deficits in conceptual, social, and practical domains. The following three
criteria must be met:
A. Deficits in intellectual functions, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning,
abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience,
confirmed by both clinical assessment and individualized, standardized
intelligence testing.
B. Deficits in adaptive functioning that result in failure to meet developmental and
sociocultural standards for personal independence and social responsibility.
Without ongoing support, the adaptive deficits limit functioning in one or more
activities of daily life, such as communication, social participation, and
independent living, across multiple environments, such as home, school, work,
and community.
C. Onset of intellectual and adaptive deficits during the developmental period.
38
Note: The term intellectual developmental disorder is used to clarify its relationship
with the WHO ICD-11 classification system, which uses the term Disorders of
Intellectual Development. The equivalent term intellectual disability is placed in
parentheses for continued use. The medical and research literature use both terms,
while intellectual disability is the term in common use by educational and other
professions, advocacy groups, and the lay public. In the United States, Public Law
111-256 (Rosa’s Law) changed all references to “mental retardation” in federal laws
to “intellectual disability.”
Specify current severity (see Table 1):
F70 Mild
F71 Moderate
F72 Severe
F73 Profound
39
TABLE 1  Severity levels for intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
disability)
Severity
level
Conceptual domain
Social domain
Practical domain
Mild
For preschool children, there may be
Compared with typically developing
The individual may function age-
no obvious conceptual differences.
For school-age children and adults,
there are difficulties in learning
academic skills involving reading,
writing, arithmetic, time, or
money, with support needed in one
or more areas to meet age-related
expectations. In adults, abstract
thinking, executive function (i.e.,
planning, strategizing, priority
setting, and cognitive flexibility),
and short-term memory, as well as
functional use of academic skills
(e.g., reading, money
management), are impaired. There
is a somewhat concrete approach
to problems and solutions
compared with age-mates.
age-mates, the individual is
immature in social interactions.
For example, there may be
difficulty in accurately perceiving
peers’ social cues.
Communication, conversation, and
language are more concrete or
immature than expected for age.
There may be difficulties
regulating emotion and behavior in
age-appropriate fashion; these
difficulties are noticed by peers in
social situations. There is limited
understanding of risk in social
situations; social judgment is
immature for age, and the person
is at risk of being manipulated by
others (gullibility).
appropriately in personal care.
Individuals need some support
with complex daily living tasks in
comparison to peers. In adulthood,
supports typically involve grocery
shopping, transportation, home
and child-care organizing,
nutritious food preparation, and
banking and money management.
Recreational skills resemble those
of age-mates, although judgment
related to well-being and
organization around recreation
requires support. In adulthood,
competitive employment is often
seen in jobs that do not emphasize
conceptual skills. Individuals
generally need support to make
health care decisions and legal
decisions, and to learn to perform
a skilled vocation competently.
Support is typically needed to raise
a family.
40
Moderate
All through development, the
individual’s conceptual skills lag
markedly behind those of peers.
For preschoolers, language and
preacademic skills develop slowly.
For school-age children, progress
in reading, writing, mathematics,
and understanding of time and
money occurs slowly across the
school years and is markedly
limited compared with that of
peers. For adults, academic skill
development is typically at an
elementary level, and support is
required for all use of academic
skills in work and personal life.
Ongoing assistance on a daily
basis is needed to complete
conceptual tasks of day-to-day life,
and others may take over these
responsibilities fully for the
individual.
The individual shows marked
differences from peers in social
and communicative behavior
across development. Spoken
language is typically a primary
tool for social communication but
is much less complex than that of
peers. Capacity for relationships is
evident in ties to family and
friends, and the individual may
have successful friendships across
life and sometimes romantic
relations in adulthood. However,
individuals may not perceive or
interpret social cues accurately.
Social judgment and decision-
making abilities are limited, and
caretakers must assist the person
with life decisions. Friendships
with typically developing peers are
often affected by communication
or social limitations. Significant
social and communicative support
is needed in work settings for
success.
The individual can care for personal
needs involving eating, dressing,
elimination, and hygiene as an
adult, although an extended period
of teaching and time is needed for
the individual to become
independent in these areas, and
reminders may be needed.
Similarly, participation in all
household tasks can be achieved
by adulthood, although an
extended period of teaching is
needed, and ongoing supports will
typically occur for adult-level
performance. Independent
employment in jobs that require
limited conceptual and
communication skills can be
achieved, but considerable support
from coworkers, supervisors, and
others is needed to manage social
expectations, job complexities, and
ancillary responsibilities such as
scheduling, transportation, health
benefits, and money management.
A variety of recreational skills can
be developed. These typically
require additional supports and
learning opportunities over an
extended period of time.
Maladaptive behavior is present in
a significant minority and causes
social problems.
41
Severe
Attainment of conceptual skills is
limited. The individual generally
has little understanding of written
language or of concepts involving
numbers, quantity, time, and
Spoken language is quite limited in
terms of vocabulary and grammar.
Speech may be single words or
phrases and may be supplemented
through augmentative means.
The individual requires support for
all activities of daily living,
including meals, dressing, bathing,
and elimination. The individual
requires supervision at all times.
money. Caretakers provide
extensive supports for problem
solving throughout life.
Speech and communication are
focused on the here and now
within everyday events. Language
is used for social communication
more than for explication.
Individuals understand simple
speech and gestural
communication. Relationships
with family members and familiar
others are a source of pleasure and
help.
The individual cannot make
responsible decisions regarding
well-being of self or others. In
adulthood, participation in tasks at
home, recreation, and work
requires ongoing support and
assistance. Skill acquisition in all
domains involves long-term
teaching and ongoing support.
Maladaptive behavior, including
self-injury, is present in a
significant minority.
Profound
Conceptual skills generally involve
the physical world rather than
symbolic processes. The individual
may use objects in goal-directed
fashion for self-care, work, and
recreation. Certain visuospatial
skills, such as matching and
sorting based on physical
characteristics, may be acquired.
However, co-occurring motor and
sensory impairments may prevent
functional use of objects.
The individual has very limited
understanding of symbolic
communication in speech or
gesture. He or she may understand
some simple instructions or
gestures. The individual expresses
his or her own desires and
emotions largely through
nonverbal, nonsymbolic
communication. The individual
enjoys relationships with well-
known family members,
caretakers, and familiar others, and
initiates and responds to social
interactions through gestural and
emotional cues. Co-occurring
sensory and physical impairments
may prevent many social
activities.
The individual is dependent on others
for all aspects of daily physical
care, health, and safety, although
he or she may be able to
participate in some of these
activities as well. Individuals
without severe physical
impairments may assist with some
daily work tasks at home, like
carrying dishes to the table. Simple
actions with objects may be the
basis of participation in some
vocational activities with high
levels of ongoing support.
Recreational activities may
involve, for example, enjoyment in
listening to music, watching
movies, going out for walks, or
participating in water activities, all
with the support of others. Co-
occurring physical and sensory
impairments are frequent barriers
to participation (beyond watching)
in home, recreational, and
vocational activities. Maladaptive
behavior is present in a significant
minority.
Specifiers
The various levels of severity are defined on the basis of adaptive functioning, and not IQ scores,
because it is adaptive functioning that determines the level of supports required. Moreover, IQ
measures are less valid in the lower end of the IQ range.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) are deficits
in general mental abilities (Criterion A) and impairment in everyday adaptive functioning, in
comparison to an individual’s age-, gender-, and socioculturally matched peers (Criterion B).
Onset is during the developmental period (Criterion C). The diagnosis of intellectual
developmental disorder is based on both clinical assessment and standardized testing of
intellectual functions, standardized neuropsychological tests, and standardized tests of adaptive
functioning.
Criterion A refers to intellectual functions that involve reasoning, problem solving, planning,
abstract thinking, judgment, learning from instruction and experience, and practical
understanding. Critical components include verbal comprehension, working memory, perceptual
reasoning, quantitative reasoning, abstract thought, and cognitive efficacy. Intellectual
functioning is typically measured with individually administered and psychometrically valid,
comprehensive, and culturally appropriate tests of intelligence. Individuals with intellectual
developmental disorder have scores of approximately two standard deviations or more below the
population mean, including a margin for measurement error (generally ± 5 points). On tests with
a standard deviation of 15 and a mean of 100, this involves a score of 65–75 (70 ± 5). Clinical
training and judgment are required to interpret test results and assess intellectual performance.
Factors that may affect test scores include practice effects (i.e., learning from repeated
testing) and the “Flynn effect” (i.e., overly high scores due to out-of-date test norms). Invalid
scores may result from the use of brief intelligence screening tests or group tests; highly
discrepant individual subtest scores may make an overall IQ score invalid. Instruments must be
normed for the individual’s sociocultural background and native language. Co-occurring
disorders that affect communication, language, and/or motor or sensory function may affect test
scores. Individual cognitive profiles based on neuropsychological testing as well as cross-battery
intellectual assessment (using multiple IQ or other cognitive tests to create a profile) are more
useful for understanding intellectual abilities than a single IQ score.
42
Such testing may identify areas of relative strengths and weaknesses, an assessment
important for academic and vocational planning. IQ test scores are approximations of conceptual
functioning but may be insufficient to assess reasoning in real-life situations and mastery of
practical tasks. For example, a person with deficits in intellectual functioning whose IQ score is
somewhat above 65–75 may nevertheless have such substantial adaptive behavior problems in
social judgment or other areas of adaptive functioning that the person’s actual functioning is
clinically comparable to that of individuals with a lower IQ score. Thus, clinical judgment is
important in interpreting the results of IQ tests, and using them as the sole criteria for the
diagnosis of an intellectual developmental disorder is insufficient.
Deficits in adaptive functioning (Criterion B) refer to how well a person meets community
standards of personal independence and social responsibility, in comparison to others of similar
age and sociocultural background. Adaptive functioning involves adaptive reasoning in three
domains: conceptual, social, and practical. The conceptual (academic) domain involves
competence in memory, language, reading, writing, math reasoning, acquisition of practical
knowledge, problem solving, and judgment in novel situations, among others. The social domain
involves awareness of others’ thoughts, feelings, and experiences; empathy; interpersonal
communication skills; friendship abilities; and social judgment, among others. The practical
domain involves learning and self-management across life settings, including personal care, job
responsibilities, money management, recreation, self-management of behavior, and school and
work task organization, among others. Intellectual capacity, education, motivation, socialization,
personality features, vocational opportunity, cultural experience, and coexisting other medical
conditions or mental disorders influence adaptive functioning.
Adaptive functioning is assessed using both clinical evaluation and individualized, culturally
appropriate, psychometrically sound measures. Standardized measures are used with
knowledgeable informants (e.g., parent or other family member; teacher; counselor; care
provider) and the individual to the extent possible. Additional sources of information include
educational, developmental, medical, and mental health evaluations. Scores from standardized
measures and interview sources must be interpreted using clinical judgment. When standardized
testing is difficult or impossible, because of a variety of factors (e.g., sensory impairment, severe
problem behavior), the individual may be diagnosed with unspecified intellectual developmental
disorder. Adaptive functioning may be difficult to assess in a controlled setting (e.g., prisons,
detention centers); if possible, corroborative information reflecting functioning outside those
settings should be obtained.
Criterion B is met when at least one domain of adaptive functioning—conceptual, social, or
practical—is sufficiently impaired that ongoing support is needed in order for the person to
perform adequately across multiple environments, such as home, school, work, and community.
Criterion C, onset during the developmental period, refers to recognition that intellectual and
adaptive deficits are present during childhood or adolescence.
A comprehensive evaluation includes an assessment of intellectual capacity and adaptive
functioning; identification of genetic and nongenetic etiologies; evaluation for associated
medical conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy, seizure disorder); and evaluation for co-occurring
mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders. Components of the evaluation may include basic
pre- and perinatal medical history, three-generational family pedigree, physical examination,
genetic evaluation (e.g., karyotype or chromosomal microarray analysis and testing for specific
genetic syndromes), and metabolic screening and neuroimaging assessment.
Associated Features
Intellectual developmental disorder is a heterogeneous condition with multiple causes. There
may be associated difficulties with social judgment; assessment of risk; self-management of
behavior, emotions, or interpersonal relationships; or motivation in school or
43
work environments. Because of a lack of awareness of risk and danger, accidental injury rates
may be increased. Lack of communication skills may predispose to disruptive and aggressive
behaviors. Gullibility is often a feature, involving naiveté in social situations and a tendency for
being easily led by others. Gullibility and lack of awareness of risk may result in exploitation by
others and possible victimization, fraud, unintentional criminal involvement, false confessions,
and risk for physical and sexual abuse. These associated features can be important in criminal
cases, including Atkins-type hearings involving the death penalty.
Beyond deficits in adaptive functioning, individuals also can become distressed about their
intellectual limitations. While such distress may not always be seen as having an impact on
functioning, distress can represent an important feature of the clinical scenario.
Prevalence
Intellectual developmental disorder has an overall general population prevalence of
approximately 10 per 1,000; however, the global prevalence varies by country and level of
development, being approximately 16 per 1,000 in middle-income countries and 9 per 1,000 in
high-income countries. The prevalence also varies by age, being higher in youth than in adults.
In the United States, prevalence per 1,000 population does not vary significantly by ethnoracial
groups.
Development and Course
Onset of intellectual developmental disorder is in the developmental period. The age and
characteristic features at onset depend on the etiology and severity of brain dysfunction. Delayed
motor, language, and social milestones may be identifiable within the first 2 years of life among
those with more severe intellectual developmental disorder, while mild levels may not be
identifiable until school age when difficulty with academic learning becomes apparent. All
criteria (including Criterion C) must be fulfilled by history or current presentation. Some
children younger than 5 years whose presentation will eventually meet criteria for intellectual
developmental disorder have deficits that meet criteria for global developmental delay.
When intellectual developmental disorder is associated with a genetic syndrome, there may
be a characteristic physical appearance (e.g., as in Down syndrome). Some syndromes have a
behavioral phenotype, which refers to specific behaviors that are characteristic of particular
genetic disorder (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome). In acquired forms, the onset may be abrupt
following an illness such as meningitis or encephalitis or head trauma occurring during the
developmental period. When intellectual developmental disorder results from a loss of
previously acquired cognitive skills, as in severe traumatic brain injury, the diagnoses of
intellectual developmental disorder and of a neurocognitive disorder may both be assigned.
Although intellectual developmental disorder is generally nonprogressive, in certain genetic
disorders (e.g., Rett syndrome) there are periods of worsening, followed by stabilization, and in
others (e.g., Sanfilippo syndrome, Down syndrome) progressive worsening of intellectual
function in varying degrees. In some cases, the progressive worsening of intellectual functioning
may represent the overlay of neurocognitive disorder that develops in adulthood (i.e., persons
with Down syndrome being at high risk for developing neurocognitive disorder due to
Alzheimer’s disease in adulthood). In this situation, both diagnoses, intellectual developmental
disorder and neurocognitive disorder, are given.
The disorder is generally lifelong, although severity levels may change over time. The course
may be influenced by underlying medical or genetic conditions and co-occurring conditions
(e.g., hearing or visual impairments, epilepsy). Early and ongoing interventions may improve
adaptive functioning throughout childhood and adulthood. In some cases, these result in
significant improvement of intellectual functioning, such that the
44
diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder is no longer appropriate. Thus, it is common
practice when assessing infants and young children to delay diagnosis of intellectual
developmental disorder until after an appropriate course of intervention is provided. For older
children and adults, the extent of support provided may allow for full participation in all
activities of daily living and improved adaptive function. Diagnostic assessments must determine
whether improved adaptive skills are the result of a stable, generalized new skill acquisition (in
which case the diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder may no longer be appropriate) or
whether the improvement is contingent on the presence of supports and ongoing interventions (in
which case the diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder may still be appropriate).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Prenatal etiologies include genetic syndromes (e.g., sequence variations
or copy number variants involving one or more genes; chromosomal disorders), inborn errors of
metabolism, brain malformations, maternal disease (including placental disease), and
environmental influences (e.g., alcohol, other drugs, toxins, teratogens). Perinatal causes include
a variety of labor and delivery–related events leading to neonatal encephalopathy. Postnatal
causes include hypoxic ischemic injury, traumatic brain injury, infections, demyelinating
disorders, seizure disorders (e.g., infantile spasms), severe and chronic social deprivation, and
toxic metabolic syndromes and intoxications (e.g., lead, mercury).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Intellectual developmental disorder occurs across ethnoracial groups. Prevalence differences
across social and cultural contexts may be due to variation in environmental risks (e.g., perinatal
injury, chronic social deprivation) for the disorder that are associated with socioeconomic status
and access to quality health care. For example, in Western Australia, the population prevalence
of intellectual developmental disorder among Aboriginal children is 39 per 1,000 people, as
opposed to 16 per 1,000 for the more affluent non-Aboriginal youth population. Cultural
sensitivity and knowledge of sociostructural conditions are needed during assessment, and the
individual’s socioeconomic, ethnic, cultural, and linguistic background; available experiences;
and adaptive functioning within his or her community and cultural setting must be considered.
Cultural explanations for intellectual developmental disorder vary and may include cultural
beliefs about supernatural influences and punishment for presumed or actual wrongdoing by the
mother or parents, which can be associated with shame and underreporting of the disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Overall, males are more likely than females to be diagnosed with both mild (average male:female
ratio 1.6:1) and severe (average male:female ratio 1.2:1) forms of intellectual developmental
disorder. However, sex ratios vary widely in reported studies. Sex-linked genetic factors, sex
differences in other genetic factors such as specific copy number variants, and male vulnerability
to brain insult may account for some of the sex differences.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder can be at risk for suicide associated with
comorbid mental disorder, higher intellectual and adaptive function, and immediate past
stressors. Comorbid mental disorder may manifest atypically in intellectual developmental
disorder; thus, recognizing comorbidity and screening for suicidal thoughts is important in the
assessment process, with particular attention to change in behavior of the individual.
45
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder should be made whenever Criteria A, B,
and C are met. A diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder should not be assumed
because of a particular genetic or medical condition. A genetic syndrome linked to intellectual
developmental disorder should be noted as a concurrent diagnosis with the intellectual
Major and mild neurocognitive disorders.
Communication disorders and specific learning disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
developmental disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder is categorized as a
neurodevelopmental disorder and is distinct from the neurocognitive disorders, which are
characterized by a loss of cognitive functioning. Major neurocognitive disorder may co-occur
with intellectual developmental disorder (e.g., an individual with Down syndrome who develops
Alzheimer’s disease, or an individual with intellectual developmental disorder who loses further
cognitive capacity following a head injury). In such cases, the diagnoses of intellectual
developmental disorder and neurocognitive disorder may both be given. Moreover, when there is
stabilization of cognitive functioning following traumatic or nontraumatic brain injury with onset
in the developmental period (childhood and adolescence), and there is no continuing cognitive
decline, both neurocognitive disorder and intellectual developmental disorder diagnoses can be
used if diagnostic criteria are met for intellectual developmental disorder.
These neurodevelopmental disorders are
specific to the communication and learning domains and do not show deficits in intellectual and
adaptive behavior. They may co-occur with intellectual developmental disorder. Both diagnoses
are made if full criteria are met for intellectual developmental disorder and a communication
disorder or specific learning disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder is common among individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Assessment of intellectual ability may be complicated by social-
communication and behavior deficits inherent to autism spectrum disorder, which may interfere
with understanding and complying with test procedures. Appropriate assessment of intellectual
functioning in autism spectrum disorder is essential, with reassessment across the developmental
period, because IQ scores in autism spectrum disorder may be unstable, particularly in early
childhood.
Comorbidity
Co-occurring neurodevelopmental and other mental and medical conditions are frequent in
intellectual developmental disorder, with rates of some conditions (e.g., mental disorders,
cerebral palsy, and epilepsy) three to four times higher than in the general population. The
prognosis and outcome of co-occurring diagnoses may be influenced by the presence of
intellectual developmental disorder. Assessment procedures may require modifications because
of associated disorders, including communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, and
motor, sensory, or other disorders. Knowledgeable informants are essential for identifying
symptoms such as irritability, mood dysregulation, aggression, eating problems, and sleep
problems, and for assessing adaptive functioning in various community settings.
The most common co-occurring neurodevelopmental and other mental disorders are
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; depressive and bipolar disorders; anxiety disorders;
autism spectrum disorder; stereotypic movement disorder (with or without self-injurious
behavior); impulse-control disorders; and major neurocognitive disorder. Major depressive
disorder may occur throughout the range of severity of intellectual developmental disorder. Self-
injurious behavior requires prompt diagnostic attention and may warrant a separate diagnosis of
stereotypic movement disorder. Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder, particularly
those with more severe intellectual developmental disorder, may also exhibit aggression and
disruptive behaviors, including harm of others or property destruction.
46
Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder disproportionately have more health
problems, including obesity, than the general population. Frequently they cannot verbalize
physical symptoms they are experiencing. This may lead to health problems being undiagnosed
and untreated.
Relationship to Other Classifications
ICD-11 uses the term disorders of intellectual development to indicate that these are disorders
that involve impaired brain functioning early in life. These disorders are described in ICD-11 as
a metasyndrome occurring in the developmental period analogous to dementia or major
neurocognitive disorder in later life. There are four subtypes of disorders of intellectual
development in ICD-11: mild, moderate, severe, and profound.
The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD) uses the
term intellectual disability. The AAIDD’s classification is multidimensional rather than
categorical and is based on the disability construct. Rather than listing severity specifiers as is
done in DSM-5, the AAIDD emphasizes a profile of supports based on severity.