Pica
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Persistent eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances over a period of at least 1
 month.
 B. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is inappropriate to the
 developmental level of the individual.
 C. The eating behavior is not part of a culturally supported or socially normative
 practice.
D. If the eating behavior occurs in the context of another mental disorder (e.g.,
 intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability], autism spectrum
 disorder, schizophrenia) or medical condition (including pregnancy), it is
 sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
 372
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for pica are F98.3 in children and F50.89 in
 adults.
 Specify if:
 In remission: After full criteria for pica were previously met, the criteria have not
 been met for a sustained period of time.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of pica is the eating of one or more nonnutritive, nonfood substances on a
 persistent basis over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A) that is severe enough to warrant
 clinical attention. Typical substances ingested tend to vary with age and availability and might
 include paper, soap, cloth, hair, string, wool, soil, chalk, talcum powder, paint, gum, metal,
 pebbles, charcoal or coal, ash, clay, starch, or ice. The term nonfood is included because the
 diagnosis of pica does not apply to ingestion of diet products that have minimal nutritional
 content. There is typically no aversion to food in general. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood
 substances must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B) and not part of a culturally
 supported or socially normative practice (Criterion C). A minimum age of 2 years is suggested
 for a pica diagnosis to exclude developmentally normal mouthing of objects by infants that
 results in ingestion. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances can be an associated feature
 of other mental disorders (e.g., intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability],
 autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia). If the eating behavior occurs exclusively in the context
 of another mental disorder, a separate diagnosis of pica should be made only if the eating
 behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention (Criterion D).
 Associated Features
 Although deficiencies in vitamins or minerals (e.g., zinc, iron) have been reported, often no
 specific biological abnormalities are found. In some cases, pica comes to clinical attention only
 following general medical complications (e.g., mechanical bowel problems; intestinal
 obstruction, such as that resulting from a bezoar; intestinal perforation; infections such as
 toxoplasmosis and toxocariasis as a result of ingesting feces or dirt; poisoning, such as by
 ingestion of lead-based paint).
 Prevalence
 Limited data suggest that the prevalence of pica is approximately 5% among school-age children.
 Roughly one-third of pregnant women, especially those with food insecurity (i.e., without
 reliable access to affordable and nutritious food), engage in pica. Conditions associated with pica
 include lack of available food and vitamin deficiency.
Development and Course
 Onset of pica can occur in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, although childhood onset is
 most commonly reported. Pica can occur in otherwise normally developing children, whereas in
 adults it appears more likely to occur in the context of intellectual developmental disorder or
 other mental disorders. The course of the disorder can be protracted and can result in medical
 emergencies (e.g., intestinal obstruction, acute weight loss, poisoning). The disorder can
 potentially be fatal depending on substances ingested.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 this condition.
 Neglect, lack of supervision, and developmental delay can increase the risk for
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In some populations, the eating of earth or other seemingly nonnutritive substances is believed to
 be of spiritual, medicinal, or other social value, or may be a culturally supported
 373
 or socially normative practice. Such behavior does not warrant a diagnosis of pica (Criterion C).
 Pica behavior may be prevalent in some cultural groups, but it should not be assumed to be
 socially normative without further evaluation.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Pica occurs in both genders. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may manifest in
 pregnancy, when specific cravings (e.g., chalk or ice) may occur. The diagnosis of pica during
 pregnancy is appropriate only if such cravings lead to the ingestion of nonnutritive, nonfood
 substances to the extent that the eating of these substances poses potential medical risks. A
 worldwide meta-analysis showed the prevalence rate of pica to be 28% during pregnancy and/or
 the postpartum period.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Abdominal flat plate radiography, ultrasound, and other scanning methods may reveal
 obstructions related to pica. Blood tests and other laboratory tests can be used to ascertain levels
 of poisoning or the nature of infection.
 Functional Consequences of Pica
 Pica can significantly impair physical functioning, but it is rarely the sole cause of impairment in
 social functioning. Pica often occurs with other disorders associated with impaired social
 functioning.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may occur during the course of other mental
disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) and in Kleine-Levin syndrome. In any
 such instance, an additional diagnosis of pica should be given only if the eating behavior is
 sufficiently persistent and severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
 Anorexia nervosa.
 Pica can usually be distinguished from the other feeding and eating disorders
 by the consumption of nonnutritive, nonfood substances. It is important to note, however, that
 some presentations of anorexia nervosa include ingestion of nonnutritive, nonfood substances,
 such as paper tissues, as a means of attempting to control appetite. In such cases, when the eating
 of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is primarily used as a means of weight control, anorexia
 nervosa should be the primary diagnosis.
 Factitious disorder.
 Some individuals with factitious disorder may intentionally ingest foreign
 objects as part of the pattern of falsification of physical symptoms. In such instances, there is an
 element of deception that is consistent with deliberate induction of injury or disease.
 Nonsuicidal self-injury and nonsuicidal self-injury behaviors in personality disorders.
 Some individuals
 may swallow potentially harmful items (e.g., pins, needles, knives) in the context of maladaptive
 behavior patterns associated with personality disorders or nonsuicidal self-injury.
 Comorbidity
 Disorders most commonly comorbid with pica are autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
 developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and, to a lesser degree, schizophrenia and
 obsessive-compulsive disorder. Pica can be associated with trichotillomania (hair-pulling
 disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder. In comorbid presentations, the hair or skin is
 typically ingested. Pica can also be associated with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder,
 particularly in individuals with a strong sensory component to their presentation. When an
 individual is known to have pica, assessment should include consideration of the possibility of
 gastrointestinal complications, poisoning, infection, and nutritional deficiency.
 374