 Binge-Eating Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized
 by both of the following:
 1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount
 of food that is definitely larger than what most people would eat in a similar
 period of time under similar circumstances.
 2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that
 one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
 B. The binge-eating episodes are associated with three (or more) of the following:
 1. Eating much more rapidly than normal.
 2. Eating until feeling uncomfortably full.
 393
 3. Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry.
 4. Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating.
 5. Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty afterward.
 C. Marked distress regarding binge eating is present.
 D. The binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.
 E. The binge eating is not associated with the recurrent use of inappropriate
 compensatory behavior as in bulimia nervosa and does not occur exclusively
 during the course of bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa.
 Specify if:
 In partial remission: After full criteria for binge-eating disorder were previously
 met, binge eating occurs at an average frequency of less than one episode per
week for a sustained period of time.
 In full remission: After full criteria for binge-eating disorder were previously met,
 none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
 Specify current severity:
 The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of episodes of binge eating
 (see below). The level of severity may be increased to reflect other symptoms and
 the degree of functional disability.
 Mild: 1–3 binge-eating episodes per week.
 Moderate: 4–7 binge-eating episodes per week.
 Severe: 8–13 binge-eating episodes per week.
 Extreme: 14 or more binge-eating episodes per week.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of binge-eating disorder is recurrent episodes of binge eating that must
 occur, on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion D). An “episode of binge
 eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is definitely
 larger than most people would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances
 (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the clinician’s estimation of
 whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that might be regarded as
 excessive for a typical meal might be considered normal during a celebration or holiday meal. A
 “discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less than 2 hours. A single episode of
 binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge
 in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home. Continual snacking on small amounts
 of food throughout the day would not be considered an eating binge.
 An occurrence of excessive food consumption must be accompanied by a sense of lack of
 control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss of control
 is the inability to refrain from eating or to stop eating once started. Some individuals describe a
 dissociative quality during, or following, the binge-eating episodes. The impairment in control
 associated with binge eating may not be absolute; for example, an individual may continue binge
 eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a roommate or spouse unexpectedly enters
 the room. Some individuals report that their binge-eating episodes are no longer characterized by
 an acute feeling of loss of control but rather by a more generalized pattern of uncontrolled eating.
 If individuals report that they have abandoned efforts to control their eating, loss of control may
 still be considered as present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.
 The type of food consumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a given
 individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the amount of
 food consumed than by a craving for a specific nutrient.
 394
 Binge eating must be characterized by marked distress (Criterion C) and at least three of the
 following features: eating much more rapidly than normal; eating until feeling uncomfortably
full; eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry; eating alone because of
 feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating; and feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or
 very guilty afterward (Criterion B).
 Individuals with binge-eating disorder are typically ashamed of their eating problems and
 attempt to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating usually occurs in secrecy or as inconspicuously
 as possible. The most common antecedent of binge eating is negative affect. Other triggers
 include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related to body weight, body
 shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mitigate factors that precipitated
 the episode in the short-term, but negative self-evaluation and dysphoria often are the delayed
 consequences.
 Associated Features
 Binge-eating disorder occurs in normal-weight/overweight and obese individuals. It is reliably
 associated with overweight and obesity in treatment-seeking individuals. Nevertheless, binge
eating disorder is distinct from obesity. Most obese individuals do not engage in recurrent binge
 eating. In addition, compared with weight-matched obese individuals without binge-eating
 disorder, those with the disorder consume more calories in laboratory studies of eating behavior
 and have greater functional impairment, lower quality of life, more subjective distress, and
 greater psychiatric comorbidity.
 Prevalence
 According to two U.S. epidemiological studies conducted in community samples, the 12-month
 prevalence of binge-eating disorder ranges from 0.44% to 1.2%, with rates two to three times
 higher in women than in men (0.6% to 1.6% in women; 0.26% to 0.8% in men), and the lifetime
 prevalence ranges from 0.85% to 2.8% (1.25% to 3.5% in women; 0.42% to 2.0% in men).
 In the United States, the prevalence of binge-eating disorder appears comparable across
 ethnoracial groups.
 Binge-eating disorder has a roughly similar prevalence in most high-income industrialized
 countries, including the United States, Canada, many European countries, Australia, and New
 Zealand, with 12-month prevalence in high-income countries ranging from 0.1% to 1.2%.
 Although fewer data are available from populations in low- and middle-income countries, binge
eating disorder prevalence in some regions of Latin America appears to be at least as high as in
 the United States and Europe. Mexican Americans in the United States have a higher prevalence
 of binge-eating disorder than their counterparts in Mexico.
 Development and Course
 Little is known about the development of binge-eating disorder. Both binge eating and loss-of
control eating without objectively excessive consumption occur in children and are associated
 with increased body fat, weight gain, and increases in psychological symptoms. Binge eating is
 common in adolescent and college-age samples. Loss-of-control eating or episodic binge eating
 may represent a prodromal phase of eating disorders for some individuals.
 Dieting follows the development of binge eating in many individuals with binge-eating
 disorder. (This is in contrast to bulimia nervosa, in which dysfunctional dieting usually precedes
the onset of binge eating.) Binge-eating disorder typically begins in adolescence or young
 adulthood but can begin in later adulthood. Individuals with binge-eating disorder who seek
 treatment usually are older than individuals with either bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa who
 seek treatment.
 395
 Remission rates in both natural course and treatment outcome studies are higher for binge
eating disorder than for bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa. The course of binge-eating disorder
 is variable and as yet incompletely understood, with at least some affected individuals showing a
 relatively persistent, at times relapsing and remitting, symptom trajectory comparable to that of
 bulimia nervosa in terms of severity and duration. Crossover from binge-eating disorder to other
 eating disorders is uncommon.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Binge-eating disorder appears to run in families, which may reflect
 additive genetic influences.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Clinical presentations of binge-eating disorder differ across ethnoracial groups in the United
 States. Black individuals may report fewer symptoms of distress associated with binge eating and
 present for treatment with higher frequency of binge eating compared with White individuals.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Suicidal ideation has been reported to occur in approximately 25% of individuals with binge
eating disorder.
 Functional Consequences of Binge-Eating Disorder
 Binge-eating disorder is associated with a range of functional consequences, including social role
 adjustment problems, impaired health-related quality of life and life satisfaction, increased
 medical morbidity and mortality, and associated increased health care utilization compared with
 body mass index (BMI)–matched control subjects. It may also be associated with an increased
 risk for weight gain and the development of obesity.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Bulimia nervosa.
 Binge-eating disorder has recurrent binge eating in common with bulimia
 nervosa but differs from the latter disorder in some fundamental respects. In terms of clinical
 presentation, the recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior (e.g., purging, driven exercise)
 seen in bulimia nervosa is absent in binge-eating disorder. Unlike individuals with bulimia
 nervosa, individuals with binge-eating disorder typically do not show marked or sustained
 dietary restriction designed to influence body weight and shape between binge-eating episodes.
 They may, however, report frequent attempts at dieting. Binge-eating disorder also differs from
 bulimia nervosa in terms of response to treatment. Rates of improvement are consistently higher
Obesity.
 Bipolar and depressive disorders.
 Borderline personality disorder.
 among individuals with binge-eating disorder than among those with bulimia nervosa.
 Binge-eating disorder is associated with overweight and obesity but has several key
 features that are distinct from obesity. First, levels of overvaluation of body weight and shape are
 higher in obese individuals with the disorder than in those without the disorder. Second, rates of
 psychiatric comorbidity are significantly higher among obese individuals with the disorder
 compared with those without the disorder. Third, the outcome of evidence-based psychological
 treatments for binge-eating disorder is more often successful than the treatment of obesity in
 individuals with comorbid obesity and binge-eating disorder.
 Increases in appetite and weight gain are included in the criteria
 for major depressive episode and in the atypical features specifiers for
 396
 depressive and bipolar disorders. Increased eating in the context of a major depressive episode
 may or may not be associated with loss of control. If the full criteria for both disorders are met,
 both diagnoses can be given. Binge eating and other symptoms of disordered eating are seen in
 association with bipolar disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses
 should be given.
 Binge eating is included in the impulsive behavior criterion that is
 part of the definition of borderline personality disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are
 met, both diagnoses should be given.
 Comorbidity
 Binge-eating disorder is associated with significant psychiatric comorbidity that is comparable to
 that of bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa. The most common comorbid disorders are major
 depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. The psychiatric comorbidity is linked to the
 severity of binge eating and not to the degree of obesity.