Diagnostic Criteria
 Rumination Disorder
 A. Repeated regurgitation of food over a period of at least 1 month. Regurgitated
 food may be re-chewed, re-swallowed, or spit out.
 B. The repeated regurgitation is not attributable to an associated gastrointestinal or
 other medical condition (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, pyloric stenosis).
 C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia
 nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restrictive food
 intake disorder.
 D. If the symptoms occur in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual
 developmental disorder [intellectual disability] or another neurodevelopmental
 F98.21
disorder), they are sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
 Specify if:
 In remission: After full criteria for rumination disorder were previously met, the
 criteria have not been met for a sustained period of time.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of rumination disorder is the repeated regurgitation of food occurring after
 feeding or eating over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A). Previously swallowed food that
 may be partially digested is brought up into the mouth without apparent nausea, involuntary
 retching, or disgust. The food may be re-chewed and then ejected from the mouth or re
swallowed. Regurgitation in rumination disorder should be frequent, occurring at least several
 times per week, typically daily. The behavior is not better explained by an associated
 gastrointestinal or other medical condition (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, pyloric stenosis)
 (Criterion B) and does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia nervosa, bulimia
 nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (Criterion C). If the
 symptoms occur in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual developmental
 disorder [intellectual disability]), they must be sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical
 attention (Criterion D) and should represent a primary aspect of the individual’s presentation
 requiring intervention. The disorder may be diagnosed across the life span, particularly in
 individuals who also have intellectual developmental disorder. Many individuals with rumination
 disorder can be directly observed engaging in the behavior by the clinician. In other instances
 diagnosis can be made on the basis of self-report or corroborative information from parents or
 caregivers. Individuals may describe the behavior as habitual or outside of their control.
 Associated Features
 Infants with rumination disorder display a characteristic position of straining and arching the
 back with the head held back, making sucking movements with their tongue. They may give the
 impression of gaining satisfaction from the activity. They may be irritable and hungry between
 episodes of regurgitation. Weight loss and failure to make expected weight gains are common
 features in infants with rumination disorder. Malnutrition may occur despite the infant’s apparent
 hunger and the ingestion of relatively large amounts of food, particularly in severe cases, when
 regurgitation immediately follows each feeding episode and regurgitated food is expelled.
 Malnutrition might also occur in older children and adults, particularly when the regurgitation is
 accompanied by restriction of intake. Adolescents and adults may attempt to disguise the
 regurgitation behavior by placing a hand over the mouth or coughing. Some will avoid eating
 with others because of the acknowledged social undesirability of the
 375
 behavior. This may extend to an avoidance of eating prior to social situations, such as work or
 school (e.g., avoiding breakfast because it may be followed by regurgitation).
 Prevalence
Although rumination disorder was historically described primarily among individuals with
 intellectual disability, the limited European data available on prevalence suggest that the disorder
 may occur in approximately 1%–2% of grade-school-age children.
 Development and Course
 Onset of rumination disorder can occur in infancy, childhood, adolescence, or adulthood. The
 age at onset in infants is usually between ages 3 and 12 months. In infants, the disorder
 frequently remits spontaneously, but its course can be protracted and can result in medical
 emergencies (e.g., severe malnutrition). It can potentially be fatal, particularly in infancy.
 Rumination disorder can have an episodic course or occur continuously until treated. In infants,
 as well as in older individuals with intellectual developmental disorder or other
 neurodevelopmental disorders, the regurgitation and rumination behavior appears to have a self
soothing or self-stimulating function, similar to that of other repetitive motor behaviors such as
 head banging.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Psychosocial problems such as lack of stimulation, neglect, stressful life
 situations, and problems in the parent-child relationship may be predisposing factors in infants
 and young children.
 Functional Consequences of Rumination Disorder
 Malnutrition secondary to repeated regurgitation may be associated with growth delay and have
 a negative effect on development and learning potential. Some older individuals with rumination
 disorder deliberately restrict their food intake because of the social undesirability of
 regurgitation. They may therefore present with weight loss or low weight. In older children,
 adolescents, and adults, social functioning is more likely to be adversely affected.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Gastrointestinal conditions.
 It is important to differentiate regurgitation in rumination disorder
 from other conditions characterized by gastroesophageal reflux or vomiting, such as
 gastroparesis, pyloric stenosis, hiatal hernia, and Sandifer syndrome in infants. These other
 medical conditions can usually be ruled out on the basis of history and clinical observation.
 Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
 Individuals with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa may
 also engage in regurgitation with subsequent spitting out of food as a means of disposing of
 ingested calories because of concerns about weight gain.
 Comorbidity
 Regurgitation with associated rumination can occur in the context of a concurrent medical
 condition or another mental disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder). When the regurgitation
 occurs in this context, a diagnosis of rumination disorder is appropriate only when the severity of
 the disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with such conditions or disorders and warrants
 additional clinical attention.
F50.82
 376