Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. An eating or feeding disturbance (e.g., apparent lack of interest in eating or food;
 avoidance based on the sensory characteristics of food; concern about aversive
 consequences of eating) associated with one (or more) of the following:
 1. Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight gain or faltering
 growth in children).
 2. Significant nutritional deficiency.
 3. Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements.
 4. Marked interference with psychosocial functioning.
 B. The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food or by an
 associated culturally sanctioned practice.
 C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia
 nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance in the way
 in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced.
 D. The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical condition or
 not better explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance
 occurs in the context of another condition or disorder, the severity of the eating
 disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and
 warrants additional clinical attention.
 Specify if:
 In remission: After full criteria for avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder were
 previously met, the criteria have not been met for a sustained period of time.
 Diagnostic Features
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder replaces and extends the DSM-IV diagnosis of feeding
 disorder of infancy or early childhood to include older children, adolescents, and adults. The
 main diagnostic feature of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is avoidance or restriction of
 food intake that is associated with one or more of the following consequences: significant weight
 loss, significant nutritional deficiency (or related health impact), dependence on enteral feeding
 or oral nutritional supplements, or marked interference with psychosocial functioning (Criterion
 A).
 In some individuals, food avoidance or restriction is based on the sensory characteristics of
 qualities of food, such as extreme sensitivity to appearance, color, smell, texture, temperature, or
 taste. Such behavior has been described as “restrictive eating,” “selective eating,” “choosy
 eating,” “perseverant eating,” “chronic food refusal,” and “food neophobia” and may manifest as
refusal to eat particular brands of foods or to tolerate the smell of food being eaten by others.
 Individuals with heightened sensory sensitivities associated with autism may show similar
 behaviors.
 In other individuals, food avoidance or restriction represents a conditioned negative response
 associated with food intake following, or in anticipation of, an aversive experience, such as
 choking; a traumatic procedure, usually involving the gastrointestinal tract (e.g.,
 esophagoscopy); or repeated vomiting. The terms functional dysphagia and globus hystericus
 have also been used for such conditions.
 In yet other individuals, food avoidance or restriction manifests as a lack of interest in eating
 or food.
 The determination of whether weight loss is significant (Criterion A1) is a clinical judgment;
 instead of losing weight, children and adolescents who have not completed growth may not
 maintain weight or height increases along their developmental trajectory.
 377
 Determination of significant nutritional deficiency (Criterion A2) is also based on clinical
 assessment (e.g., assessment of dietary intake, physical examination, and laboratory testing), and
 related impact on physical health can be of a similar severity to that seen in anorexia nervosa
 (e.g., hypothermia, bradycardia, anemia). In severe cases, particularly in infants, malnutrition can
 be life-threatening. “Dependence” on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements (Criterion
 A3) means that supplementary feeding is required to sustain adequate intake. Examples of
 individuals requiring supplementary feeding include infants with failure to thrive who require
 nasogastric tube feeding, children with neurodevelopmental disorders who are dependent on
 nutritionally complete supplements, and individuals who rely on gastrostomy tube feeding or
 complete oral nutrition supplements in the absence of an underlying medical condition. Inability
 to participate in normal social activities, such as eating with others, attending school or work, or
 sustaining relationships as a result of the disturbance would indicate marked interference with
 psychosocial functioning (Criterion A4). Substantial disruption of family functioning (e.g.,
 marked restriction of foods permitted in the home, inordinate accommodations to provide foods
 from specific grocery stores or restaurants) may also satisfy Criterion A4.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder does not include avoidance or restriction of food
 intake related to lack of availability of food (e.g., food insecurity) or to cultural practices (e.g.,
 religious fasting or normal dieting) (Criterion B). The disturbance is not better explained by
 excessive concern about body weight or shape (Criterion C) or by concurrent medical factors or
 mental disorders (Criterion D).
 Associated Features
 Several features may be associated with food avoidance or reduced food intake, and these
 features may differ across ages. Very young infants may present with food refusal, gagging, or
 vomiting. Infants and young children may not engage with a primary caregiver during feeding or
 communicate hunger in favor of other activities. In older children and adolescents, food
 avoidance or restriction may be associated with more generalized emotional difficulties that do
 not meet diagnostic criteria for an anxiety, depressive, or bipolar disorder, sometimes called
“food avoidance emotional disorder.”
 Prevalence
 Little information is available on the prevalence of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. A
 study in Australia reported a frequency of 0.3% among individuals age 15 years or older.
 Development and Course
 Food avoidance or restriction associated with insufficient intake or lack of interest in eating most
 commonly develops in infancy or early childhood and may persist in adulthood. Likewise,
 avoidance based on sensory characteristics of food tends to arise in the first decade of life but
 may persist into adulthood. Avoidance related to aversive consequences can arise at any age. The
 scant literature regarding long-term outcomes suggests that food avoidance or restriction based
 on sensory aspects is relatively stable and long-standing, but when persisting into adulthood,
 such avoidance/restriction can be associated with relatively normal functioning. There is
 currently insufficient evidence directly linking avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and
 subsequent onset of an eating disorder.
 Infants with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder may be irritable and difficult to console
 during feeding, or may appear apathetic and withdrawn. In some instances, caregiver-child
 interaction may contribute to the infant’s feeding problem (e.g., presenting food inappropriately,
 or interpreting the infant’s behavior as an act of aggression or rejection). Inadequate nutritional
 intake may exacerbate the associated features (e.g., irritability, developmental lags) and further
 contribute to feeding difficulties. Associated factors
 378
 include infant temperament or developmental impairments that reduce an infant’s
 responsiveness to feeding. Coexisting parental psychopathology, or child abuse or neglect, is
 suggested if feeding and weight improve in response to changing caregivers. In infants, children,
 and prepubertal adolescents, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder may be associated with
 growth delay, and the resulting malnutrition negatively affects development and learning
 potential. In older children, adolescents, and adults, social functioning tends to be adversely
 affected. Regardless of the age, family function may be affected, with heightened stress at
 mealtimes and in other feeding or eating contexts involving friends and relatives.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder manifests more commonly in children and
 adolescents than in adults, and there may be a long delay between onset and clinical presentation.
 Triggers for presentation vary considerably and include physical, social, and emotional
 difficulties.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Anxiety disorders, autism spectrum disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder may increase risk for avoidant or restrictive feeding or
 eating behavior characteristic of the disorder.
 Environmental.
 Environmental risk factors for avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder include
 familial anxiety. Higher rates of feeding disturbances may occur in children of mothers with
eating disorders.
 Genetic and physiological.
 History of gastrointestinal conditions, gastroesophageal reflux disease,
 vomiting, and a range of other medical problems has been associated with feeding and eating
 behaviors characteristic of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Presentations similar to avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder occur in various populations,
 including in the United States, Canada, Australia, Europe, Japan, and China. Avoidant/restrictive
 food intake disorder should not be diagnosed when avoidance of food intake is solely related to
 specific religious or cultural practices.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder appears to be approximately equally common in boys
 and girls, but avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder comorbid with autism spectrum disorder
 has a male predominance. Food avoidance or restriction related to altered sensory sensitivities
 can occur in some physiological conditions, most notably pregnancy, but is not usually extreme
 and does not meet full criteria for the disorder.
 Functional Consequences of Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
 Associated developmental and functional limitations include impairment of physical
 development and social difficulties that can have a significant negative impact on family
 function.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Restriction of food intake is a nonspecific symptom that can accompany a number of mental
 disorders and medical conditions and that can also be developmentally appropriate.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be diagnosed concurrently with the disorders below
 if all criteria are met, and the eating disturbance requires specific clinical attention.
 379
 Other medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, food allergies and intolerances, occult
 malignancies).
 Restriction of food intake may occur in other medical conditions, especially those with ongoing
 symptoms such as vomiting, loss of appetite, nausea, abdominal pain, or diarrhea. A diagnosis of
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires that the disturbance of intake is beyond that
 directly accounted for by physical symptoms consistent with a medical condition; the eating
 disturbance may also persist after being triggered by a medical condition and following
 resolution of the medical condition.
 Underlying medical or comorbid mental conditions may complicate feeding and eating.
 Because older individuals, postsurgical patients, and individuals receiving chemotherapy often
 lose their appetite, an additional diagnosis of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires
 that the eating disturbance is a primary focus for intervention.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric
syndrome.
 Acute-onset symptoms, late age at onset, or atypical symptoms suggest the need for a thorough
 assessment to rule out the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
 pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS). PANS is characterized by abrupt,
 dramatic onset of obsessive-compulsive symptoms or severely restricted food intake, together
 with a range of additional neuropsychiatric symptoms.
 Specific neurological/neuromuscular, structural, or congenital disorders and conditions
 associated with feeding difficulties.
 Feeding difficulties are common in a number of congenital and neurological conditions often
 related to problems with oral/esophageal/pharyngeal structure and function, such as hypotonia of
 musculature, tongue protrusion, and unsafe swallowing. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
 can be diagnosed in individuals with such presentations as long as all diagnostic criteria are met.
 Reactive attachment disorder.
 Some degree of withdrawal from caregivers is characteristic of
 reactive attachment disorder and can lead to a disturbance in the caregiver-child relationship that
 can affect feeding and the child’s intake. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be
 diagnosed concurrently only if all criteria are met for both disorders and the feeding disturbance
 is a primary focus for intervention.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Individuals with autism spectrum disorder often present with rigid
 eating behaviors and heightened sensory sensitivities. However, these features do not always
 result in the level of impairment that would be required for a diagnosis of avoidant/restrictive
 food intake disorder. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be diagnosed concurrently
 only if all criteria are met for both disorders and when the eating disturbance requires specific
 treatment.
 Specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, and other anxiety disorders.
 Specific phobia, other type,
 includes as an example “situations that may lead to choking or vomiting” and can represent the
 primary trigger for the fear, anxiety, or avoidance required for diagnosis. Distinguishing specific
 phobia from avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be difficult when a fear of choking or
 vomiting has resulted in food avoidance. Although avoidance or restriction of food intake
 secondary to a pronounced fear of choking or vomiting can be conceptualized as specific phobia,
 in situations when the eating problem becomes the primary focus of clinical attention,
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder becomes the appropriate diagnosis. In social anxiety
 disorder, the individual may present with a fear of being observed by others while eating, which
 can also occur in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
 Anorexia nervosa.
 Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements leading to significantly
 low body weight is a core feature of anorexia nervosa. However, individuals with anorexia
 nervosa also display a fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that
 interferes with weight gain, as well as specific disturbances in
 380
 relation to perception and experience of their own body weight and shape. These features are not
 present in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, and the two disorders should not be
 diagnosed concurrently. Differential diagnosis between avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
 and anorexia nervosa may be difficult, especially in late childhood and early adolescence,
 because these disorders may share a number of common symptoms (e.g., food avoidance, low
weight). Differential diagnosis is also potentially difficult in individuals with anorexia nervosa
 who deny any fear of fatness but nonetheless engage in persistent behaviors that prevent weight
 gain and who do not recognize the medical seriousness of their low weight—a presentation
 sometimes termed “non–fat phobic anorexia nervosa.” Full consideration of symptoms, course,
 and family history is advised, and diagnosis may be best made in the context of a clinical
 relationship over time. In some individuals, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder might
 precede the onset of anorexia nervosa.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder may present with
 avoidance or restriction of intake in relation to preoccupations with food or ritualized eating
 behavior. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be diagnosed concurrently only if all
 criteria are met for both disorders and when the aberrant eating is a major aspect of the clinical
 presentation requiring specific intervention.
 Major depressive disorder.
 In major depressive disorder, appetite might be affected to such an
 extent that individuals present with significantly restricted food intake, usually in relation to
 overall energy intake and often associated with weight loss. Usually appetite loss and related
 reduction of intake abate with resolution of mood problems. Avoidant/restrictive food intake
 disorder should only be used concurrently if full criteria are met for both disorders and when the
 eating disturbance requires specific treatment.
 Schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
 Individuals with schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other
 psychotic disorders may exhibit odd eating behaviors, avoidance of specific foods because of
 delusional beliefs, or other manifestations of avoidant or restrictive intake. In some cases,
 delusional beliefs may contribute to a concern about negative consequences of ingesting certain
 foods. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be used concurrently only if all criteria
 are met for both disorders and when the eating disturbance requires specific treatment.
 Factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on another.
 Avoidant/restrictive 
food 
intake
 disorder should be differentiated from factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on
 another. In order to assume the sick role, some individuals with factitious disorder may
 intentionally describe diets that are much more restrictive than those they are actually able to
 consume, as well as complications of such behavior, such as a need for enteral feedings or
 nutritional supplements, an inability to tolerate a normal range of foods, and/or an inability to
 participate normally in age-appropriate situations involving food. The presentation may be
 impressively dramatic and engaging, and the symptoms reported inconsistently. In factitious
 disorder imposed on another, the caregiver describes symptoms consistent with
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and may induce physical symptoms such as failure to
 gain weight. As with any diagnosis of factitious disorder imposed on another, the caregiver
 receives the diagnosis rather than the affected individual, and diagnosis should be made only on
 the basis of a careful, comprehensive assessment of the affected individual, the caregiver, and
 their interaction.
 Developmentally normal behavior.
 During normal development, some toddlers and children
 transiently narrow the variety of foods they are willing to eat. This phenomenon, sometimes
 referred to as “picky eating,” usually resolves spontaneously without intervention.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder does not include such developmentally normal
 behaviors unless they become sufficiently severe to lead to failure to meet appropriate nutritional
needs or produce significant impairment in functioning (Criterion A).
 381
 Comorbidity
 The most commonly observed disorders comorbid with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
 are anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and neurodevelopmental disorders
 (specifically autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and intellectual
 developmental disorder [intellectual disability]).