Anorexia Nervosa
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a significantly low
 body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical
 health. Significantly low weight is defined as a weight that is less than minimally
 normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected.
 B. Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that
 interferes with weight gain, even though at a significantly low weight.
 C. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced,
 undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of
 recognition of the seriousness of the current low body weight.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the subtype (see below).
 Specify whether:
 F50.01 Restricting type: During the last 3 months, the individual has not
 engaged in recurrent episodes of binge-eating or purging behavior (i.e., self
induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas). This subtype
 describes presentations in which weight loss is accomplished primarily through
 dieting, fasting, and/or excessive exercise.
 F50.02 Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, the individual has
 engaged in recurrent episodes of binge-eating or purging behavior (i.e., self
induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas).
 Specify if:
 In partial remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously met,
 Criterion A (low body weight) has not been met for a sustained period, but either
 Criterion B (intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat or behavior that
 interferes with weight gain) or Criterion C (disturbances in self-perception of
 weight and shape) is still met.
 In full remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously met,
 none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
Specify current severity:
 The minimum level of severity is based, for adults, on current body mass index (BMI)
 (see below) or, for children and adolescents, on BMI percentile. The ranges below
 are derived from World Health Organization categories for thinness in adults; for
 children and adolescents, corresponding BMI percentiles should be used. The level
 of severity may be increased to reflect clinical symptoms, the degree of functional
 disability, and the need for supervision.
 Mild: BMI ≥ 17 kg/m2.
 Moderate: BMI 16–16.99 kg/m2.
 Severe: BMI 15–15.99 kg/m2.
 Extreme: BMI < 15 kg/m2.
 Subtypes
 382
 Most individuals with the binge-eating/purging type of anorexia nervosa who binge eat also
 purge through self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas. Some
 individuals with this subtype of anorexia nervosa do not binge eat but do regularly purge after
 the consumption of small amounts of food.
 Crossover between the subtypes over the course of the disorder is not uncommon; therefore,
 subtype description should be used to describe current symptoms rather than longitudinal course.
 Diagnostic Features
 There are three essential features of anorexia nervosa: persistent energy intake restriction; intense
 fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain;
 and a disturbance in self-perceived weight or shape. The individual maintains a body weight that
 is below a minimally normal level for age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health
 (Criterion A). Individuals’ body weights frequently meet this criterion following a significant
 weight loss, but among children and adolescents, there may alternatively be failure to make
 expected weight gain or to maintain a normal developmental trajectory (i.e., while growing in
 height) instead of weight loss.
 Criterion A requires that the individual’s weight be significantly low (i.e., less than
 minimally normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected). Weight
 assessment can be challenging because normal weight range differs among individuals, and
 different thresholds have been published defining thinness or underweight status. Body mass
 index (BMI; calculated as weight in kilograms/height in meters2) is a useful measure to assess
 body weight for height. For adults, a BMI of 18.5 kg/m2 has been employed by the Centers for
 Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) as the lower
 limit of normal body weight. Therefore, most adults with a BMI greater than or equal to 18.5
 kg/m2 would not be considered to have a significantly low body weight. On the other hand, a
 BMI of lower than 17.0 kg/m2 has been considered by the WHO to indicate moderate or severe
 thinness; therefore, an individual with a BMI less than 17.0 kg/m2 would likely be considered to
have a significantly low weight. An adult with a BMI between 17.0 and 18.5 kg/m2, or even
 slightly above 18.5 kg/m2, might be considered to have a significantly low weight if clinical
 history or other physiological information supports this judgment. Adults who are not
 underweight by population-based standards—for example, adults with BMIs of 19.0 kg/m2 or
 greater—should not be assigned a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa; a diagnosis of other specified
 feeding or eating disorder (atypical anorexia nervosa) may be considered for such individuals.
 BMI 
For children and adolescents, determining a BMI-for-age percentile is useful (see, e.g., the
 CDC 
percentile 
calculator 
for 
children 
and 
teenagers;
 https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/bmi/calculator.html). As for adults, it is not possible to
 provide definitive standards for judging whether a child’s or an adolescent’s weight is
 significantly low, and variations in developmental trajectories among youth limit the utility of
 simple numerical guidelines. The CDC has used a BMI-for-age below the 5th percentile as
 suggesting underweight; children and adolescents with a BMI above this benchmark may be
 judged to be significantly underweight in light of failure to maintain their expected growth
 trajectory. However, such individuals whose BMI nonetheless remains greater than the median
 BMI for age should not be assigned a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa; a diagnosis of other
 specified feeding or eating disorder (atypical anorexia nervosa) may be considered for such
 individuals.
 Individuals with this disorder typically display an intense fear of gaining weight or of
 becoming fat (Criterion B). This intense fear of becoming fat is usually not alleviated by weight
 loss. In fact, concern about weight gain may increase even as weight falls. Younger individuals
 with anorexia nervosa, as well as some adults, may not recognize or
 383
 acknowledge a fear of weight gain. In the absence of another explanation for the significantly
 low weight, clinician inference drawn from collateral history, observational data, physical and
 laboratory findings, or longitudinal course either indicating a fear of weight gain or supporting
 persistent behaviors that prevent it may be used to establish Criterion B.
 The experience and significance of body weight and shape are distorted in these individuals
 (Criterion C). Some individuals feel globally overweight. Others realize that they are thin but are
 still concerned that certain body parts, particularly the abdomen, buttocks, and thighs, are “too
 fat.” They may employ a variety of techniques to evaluate their body size or weight, including
 frequent weighing, obsessive measuring of body parts, and persistent use of a mirror to check for
 perceived areas of “fat.” The self-esteem of individuals with anorexia nervosa is highly
 dependent on their perceptions of body shape and weight. Weight loss is often viewed as an
 impressive achievement and a sign of extraordinary self-discipline, whereas weight gain is
 perceived as an unacceptable failure of self-control. Although some individuals with this
 disorder may acknowledge being thin, they often do not recognize the serious medical
 implications of their malnourished state.
 Often, the individual is brought to professional attention by family members after marked
 weight loss (or failure to make expected weight gains) has occurred. If individuals seek help on
 their own, it is usually because of distress over the somatic and psychological sequelae of
 starvation. It is rare for an individual with anorexia nervosa to complain of weight loss per se. In
 fact, individuals with anorexia nervosa frequently either lack insight into or deny the problem. It
is therefore often important to obtain information from family members or other sources to
 evaluate the history of weight loss and other features of the illness.
 Associated Features
 The semistarvation of anorexia nervosa, and the purging behaviors sometimes associated with it,
 can result in significant and potentially life-threatening medical conditions. The nutritional
 compromise associated with this disorder affects most major organ systems and can produce a
 variety of disturbances. Physiological disturbances, including amenorrhea and vital sign
 abnormalities, are common. While most of the physiological disturbances associated with
 malnutrition are reversible with nutritional rehabilitation, some, including loss of bone mineral
 density, are often not completely reversible. Behaviors such as self-induced vomiting and misuse
 of laxatives, diuretics, and enemas may cause a number of disturbances that lead to abnormal
 laboratory findings; however, some individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit no laboratory
 abnormalities.
 When seriously underweight, many individuals with anorexia nervosa have depressive signs
 and symptoms such as depressed mood, social withdrawal, irritability, insomnia, and diminished
 interest in sex. Because these features are also observed in individuals without anorexia nervosa
 who are significantly undernourished, many of the depressive features may be secondary to the
 physiological sequelae of semistarvation, although they may also be sufficiently severe to
 warrant an additional diagnosis of major depressive disorder.
 Obsessive-compulsive features, both related and unrelated to food, are often prominent. Most
 individuals with anorexia nervosa are preoccupied with thoughts of food. Some collect recipes or
 hoard food. Observations of behaviors associated with other forms of starvation suggest that
 obsessions and compulsions related to food may be exacerbated by undernutrition. When
 individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit obsessions and compulsions that are not related to
 food, body shape, or weight, an additional diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
 may be warranted.
 Other features sometimes associated with anorexia nervosa include concerns about eating in
 public, feelings of ineffectiveness, a strong desire to control one’s environment, inflexible
 thinking, limited social spontaneity, and overly restrained emotional expression.
 384
 Compared with individuals with anorexia nervosa, restricting type, those with binge
eating/purging type have higher rates of impulsivity and are more likely to abuse alcohol and
 other drugs.
 Some individuals with anorexia nervosa show excessive levels of physical activity. Increases
 in physical activity often precede onset of the disorder, and over the course of the disorder
 increased activity accelerates weight loss. During treatment, excessive activity may be difficult
 to control, thereby jeopardizing weight recovery.
 Individuals with anorexia nervosa may misuse medications, such as by manipulating dosage,
 in order to achieve weight loss or avoid weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus may omit
 or reduce insulin doses in order to minimize carbohydrate utilization.
Prevalence
 According to two U.S. epidemiological studies conducted in community samples, the 12-month
 prevalence of anorexia nervosa ranges from 0.0% to 0.05% with much higher rates in women
 than in men (0% to 0.08% in women; 0% to 0.01% in men), and the lifetime prevalence ranges
 from 0.60% to 0.80% (0.9% to 1.42% in women; 0.12% to 0.3% in men). By contrast, one study
 of adolescents found similar rates in both genders.
 Anorexia nervosa appears to be most prevalent in postindustrialized, high-income countries
 such as in the United States, many European countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan.
 Although the prevalence of anorexia nervosa is uncertain in most low- and middle-income
 countries, it appears to be increasing in many countries in the Global South, including in Asia
 and the Middle East. Anorexia nervosa occurs across U.S. ethnoracial groups; however, its
 prevalence seems to be lower among Latinx and non-Latinx Black Americans than among non
Latinx Whites.
 Development and Course
 Anorexia nervosa commonly begins during adolescence or young adulthood. It rarely begins
 before puberty or after age 40, but cases of both early and late onset have been described. The
 onset of this disorder is often associated with a stressful life event, such as leaving home for
 college. The course and outcome of anorexia nervosa are highly variable. Younger individuals
 may manifest atypical features, including denying “fear of fat.” Older individuals more likely
 have a longer duration of illness, and their clinical presentation may include more signs and
 symptoms of long-standing disorder. Clinicians should not exclude anorexia nervosa from the
 differential diagnosis solely on the basis of older age.
 Many individuals have a period of changed eating behavior prior to full criteria for the
 disorder being met. Some individuals with anorexia nervosa recover fully after a single episode,
 with some exhibiting a fluctuating pattern of weight gain followed by relapse, and others
 experiencing a chronic course over many years. Hospitalization may be required to restore
 weight and to address medical complications. Most individuals with anorexia nervosa experience
 remission within 5 years of presentation. Among individuals admitted to hospitals, overall
 remission rates may be lower. The crude mortality rate for anorexia nervosa is approximately 5%
 per decade. Death most commonly results from medical complications associated with the
 disorder itself or from suicide.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Individuals who develop anxiety disorders or display obsessional traits in
 childhood are at increased risk for developing anorexia nervosa.
 Environmental.
 Historical and cross-cultural variability in the prevalence of anorexia nervosa
 supports its association with cultures and settings in which thinness is valued. Occupations and
 avocations that encourage thinness, such as modeling and elite athletics, are also associated with
 increased risk.
 385
Genetic and physiological.
 There is an increased risk for anorexia nervosa and for other eating and
 psychiatric disorders among biological relatives of individuals with anorexia nervosa. Genome
wide association studies have begun to identify specific risk loci, including loci associated with
 other psychiatric disorders and with metabolic traits such as insulin resistance and lipid profile.
 A range of brain abnormalities, many suggesting abnormal processing of reward, has been
 described in anorexia nervosa using functional imaging technologies such as functional magnetic
 resonance imaging and positron emission tomography. The degree to which these findings reflect
 changes associated with malnutrition versus primary abnormalities associated with the disorder
 is unclear.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Anorexia nervosa occurs across culturally and socially diverse populations, although available
 evidence suggests cross-cultural variation in its occurrence and presentation. The presentation of
 weight concerns among individuals with feeding and eating disorders varies substantially across
 cultural contexts. The absence of an expressed intense fear of weight gain, sometimes referred to
 as “fat phobia,” appears to be relatively more common in populations in Asia, where the
 rationale for dietary restriction is commonly related to a more culturally sanctioned complaint
 such as gastrointestinal discomfort. Mental health service utilization in the United States among
 individuals with an eating disorder is significantly lower among underserved ethnic and
 racialized groups.
 Diagnostic Markers
 The following laboratory abnormalities may be observed in anorexia nervosa; their presence may
 serve to increase diagnostic confidence.
 Hematology.
 Leukopenia is common, with the loss of all cell types but usually with apparent
 lymphocytosis. Mild anemia can occur, as well as thrombocytopenia and, rarely, bleeding
 problems.
 Serum chemistry.
 Dehydration may be reflected by an elevated blood urea nitrogen level.
 Hypercholesterolemia is common. Hepatic enzyme levels may be elevated. Hypomagnesemia,
 hypozincemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperamylasemia are occasionally observed. Self
induced vomiting may lead to metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), hypochloremia,
 and hypokalemia; laxative abuse may cause a mild metabolic acidosis.
 Endocrine.
 Serum thyroxine (T4) levels are usually in the low-normal range; triiodothyronine
 (T3) levels are decreased, while reverse T3 levels are elevated. Females have low serum estrogen
 levels, whereas males have low levels of serum testosterone.
 Electrocardiography.
 Sinus bradycardia is common, and, rarely, arrhythmias are noted. Significant
 prolongation of the QTc interval is observed in some individuals.
 Bone mass.
 Low bone mineral density, with specific areas of osteopenia or osteoporosis, is often
 seen. The risk of fracture is significantly elevated.
 Electroencephalography.
 Diffuse abnormalities, reflecting a metabolic encephalopathy, may result
 from significant fluid and electrolyte disturbances.
 Resting energy expenditure.
 There is often a significant reduction in resting energy expenditure.
Physical signs and symptoms.
 Many of the physical signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa are
 attributable to starvation. Amenorrhea is commonly present and appears to be an indicator of
 physiological dysfunction. If present, amenorrhea is usually a consequence of the weight loss,
 but in a minority of individuals it may actually precede the weight loss. In prepubertal females,
 menarche may be delayed. In addition to amenorrhea, there may be complaints of constipation,
 abdominal pain, cold intolerance, lethargy, and excess energy.
 386
 The most remarkable finding on physical examination is emaciation. Commonly, there is also
 significant hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia. Some individuals develop lanugo, a fine
 downy body hair. Some develop peripheral edema, especially during weight restoration or upon
 cessation of laxative and diuretic abuse. Rarely, petechiae or ecchymoses, usually on the
 extremities, may indicate a bleeding diathesis. Some individuals evidence a yellowing of the skin
 associated with hypercarotenemia. As may be seen in individuals with bulimia nervosa,
 individuals with anorexia nervosa who self-induce vomiting may have hypertrophy of the
 salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, as well as dental enamel erosion. Some
 individuals may have scars or calluses on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated contact
 with the teeth while inducing vomiting.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Suicide risk is elevated in anorexia nervosa, with rates reported to be 18 times greater than in an
 age- and gender-matched comparison group. A systematic review found that suicide is the
 second leading cause of death in anorexia nervosa. Another review found that one-quarter to
 one-third of individuals with anorexia nervosa have suicidal ideation, and approximately 9%
25% of individuals with anorexia nervosa have attempted suicide. Likely contributors to the
 increased risk for suicide in those with eating disorders include greater exposure to sexual abuse;
 impaired decision-making; high rates of nonsuicidal self-injury, a known risk factor for suicide
 attempts; and comorbidity with mood disorders.
 Functional Consequences of Anorexia Nervosa
 Individuals with anorexia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated with
 the disorder. While some individuals remain active in social and professional functioning, others
 demonstrate significant social isolation and/or failure to fulfill academic or career potential.
 Differential Diagnosis
 In addition to the general consideration of differential diagnosis for all cases, it is especially
 important to consider other possible causes of either significantly low body weight or significant
 weight loss when the presenting features are atypical (e.g., onset after age 40 years).
 Medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, hyperthyroidism, occult malignancies, and
 acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]).
 Serious weight loss may occur in medical conditions, but individuals with these disorders usually
 do not also manifest a disturbance in the way their body weight or shape is experienced or an
 intense fear of weight gain or persist in behaviors that interfere with appropriate weight gain.
Acute weight loss associated with a medical condition can occasionally be followed by the onset
 or recurrence of anorexia nervosa, which can initially be masked by the comorbid medical
 condition. Rarely, anorexia nervosa develops after bariatric surgery.
 Major depressive disorder.
 In major depressive disorder, severe weight loss may occur, but most
 individuals with major depressive disorder do not have either a desire for excessive weight loss
 or an intense fear of gaining weight.
 Schizophrenia.
 Individuals with schizophrenia may exhibit odd eating behavior and occasionally
 experience significant weight loss, but they rarely show the fear of gaining weight and the body
 image disturbance required for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.
 Substance use disorders.
 Individuals with substance use disorders may experience low weight
 because of poor nutritional intake but generally do not fear gaining weight and do not manifest
 body image disturbance. Individuals who abuse substances that reduce appetite (e.g., cocaine,
 stimulants) and who also endorse fear of weight gain should be carefully evaluated for the
 possibility of comorbid anorexia nervosa, given that the substance use may represent a persistent
 behavior that interferes with weight gain (Criterion B).
 387
 Social anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and body dysmorphic disorder.
 Some of the
 features of anorexia nervosa overlap with the criteria for social anxiety disorder, OCD, and body
 dysmorphic disorder. Specifically, individuals may feel humiliated or embarrassed to be seen
 eating in public, as in social anxiety disorder; may exhibit obsessions and compulsions related to
 food, as in OCD; or may be preoccupied with an imagined defect in bodily appearance, as in
 body dysmorphic disorder. If the individual with anorexia nervosa has social fears that are
 limited to eating behavior alone, the diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should not be made, but
 social fears unrelated to eating behavior (e.g., excessive fear of speaking in public) may warrant
 an additional diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Similarly, an additional diagnosis of OCD
 should be considered only if the individual exhibits obsessions and compulsions unrelated to
 food (e.g., an excessive fear of contamination), and an additional diagnosis of body dysmorphic
 disorder should be considered only if the distortion is unrelated to body shape and size (e.g.,
 preoccupation that one’s nose is too big).
 Bulimia nervosa.
 Individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit recurrent episodes of binge eating,
 engage in inappropriate behavior to avoid weight gain (e.g., self-induced vomiting), and are
 overly concerned with body shape and weight. However, unlike individuals with anorexia
 nervosa, binge-eating/purging type, individuals with bulimia nervosa maintain body weight at or
 above a minimally normal level.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
 Individuals with this disorder may exhibit significant
 weight loss or significant nutritional deficiency, but they do not have a fear of gaining weight or
 of becoming fat, nor do they have a disturbance in the way they experience their body shape and
 weight.
 Comorbidity
 Bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders commonly co-occur with anorexia nervosa. Many
F50.2
 individuals with anorexia nervosa report the presence of either an anxiety disorder or symptoms
 of anxiety prior to onset of their eating disorder. OCD is described in some individuals with
 anorexia nervosa, especially those with the restricting type. Alcohol use disorder and other
 substance use disorders may also be comorbid with anorexia nervosa, especially among those
 with the binge-eating/purging type.