Bulimia Nervosa
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized
 by both of the following:
 1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount
 of food that is definitely larger than what most individuals would eat in a
 similar period of time under similar circumstances.
 2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that
 one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
 B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors in order to prevent weight gain,
 such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other
 medications; fasting; or excessive exercise.
 C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, on
 average, at least once a week for 3 months.
 D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.
 E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa.
 388
 Specify if:
 In partial remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met,
 some, but not all, of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
 In full remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met,
 none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
 Specify current severity:
 The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of inappropriate
 compensatory behaviors (see below). The level of severity may be increased to
 reflect other symptoms and the degree of functional disability.
 Mild: An average of 1–3 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per
 week.
 Moderate: An average of 4–7 episodes of inappropriate compensatory
 behaviors per week.
Severe: An average of 8–13 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors
 per week.
 Extreme: An average of 14 or more episodes of inappropriate compensatory
 behaviors per week.
 Diagnostic Features
 There are three essential features of bulimia nervosa: recurrent episodes of binge eating
 (Criterion A), recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain (Criterion
 B), and self-evaluation that is unduly influenced by body shape and weight (Criterion D). To
 qualify for the diagnosis, the binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors must occur,
 on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion C).
 An “episode of binge eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of
 food that is definitely larger than most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under
 similar circumstances (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the
 clinician’s estimation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that
 might be regarded as excessive for a typical meal might be considered normal during a
 celebration or holiday meal. A “discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less
 than 2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example,
 an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home.
 Continual snacking on small amounts of food throughout the day would not be considered an
 eating binge.
 An occurrence of excessive food consumption must be accompanied by a sense of lack of
 control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss of control
 is the inability to refrain from eating or to stop eating once started. Some individuals describe a
 dissociative quality during, or following, the binge-eating episodes. The impairment in control
 associated with binge eating may not be absolute; for example, an individual may continue binge
 eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a roommate or spouse unexpectedly enters
 the room. Some individuals report that their binge-eating episodes are no longer characterized by
 an acute feeling of loss of control but rather by a more generalized pattern of uncontrolled eating.
 If individuals report that they have abandoned efforts to control their eating, loss of control
 should be considered as present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.
 The type of food consumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a given
 individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the amount of
 food consumed than by a craving for a specific nutrient. However, during binges, individuals
 tend to eat foods they would otherwise avoid.
 Individuals with bulimia nervosa are typically ashamed of their eating problems and attempt
 to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating usually occurs in secrecy or as inconspicuously as
 possible. The binge eating often continues until the individual is uncomfortably, or even
 painfully, full. The most common antecedent of binge eating is negative affect.
 389
 Other triggers include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related to
 body weight, body shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mitigate factors
that precipitated the episode in the short-term, but negative self-evaluation and dysphoria often
 are the delayed consequences.
 Another essential feature of bulimia nervosa is the recurrent use of inappropriate
 compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain (Criterion B). Many individuals with bulimia
 nervosa employ several methods to compensate for binge eating. Self-induced vomiting, a type
 of purging behavior, is the most common inappropriate compensatory behavior. The immediate
 effects of vomiting include relief from physical discomfort and reduction of fear of gaining
 weight. In some cases, vomiting becomes a goal in itself, and the individual will binge eat in
 order to vomit or will vomit after eating a small amount of food. Individuals with bulimia
 nervosa may use a variety of methods to induce vomiting, including the use of fingers or
 instruments to stimulate the gag reflex. Individuals generally become adept at inducing vomiting
 and are eventually able to vomit at will. Rarely, individuals consume syrup of ipecac to induce
 vomiting. Other purging behaviors include the misuse of laxatives and diuretics and, in rare
 cases, the misuse of enemas following episodes of binge eating, although this is seldom the sole
 compensatory method employed. A number of compensatory methods other than purging may
 also be used in rare cases. Some individuals may take thyroid hormone in an attempt to avoid
 weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus and bulimia nervosa may omit or reduce insulin
 doses in order to reduce the metabolism of food consumed during eating binges. Individuals with
 bulimia nervosa may fast for a day or more or exercise excessively in an attempt to prevent
 weight gain. Exercise may be considered excessive when it significantly interferes with
 important activities, when it occurs at inappropriate times or in inappropriate settings, or when
 the individual continues to exercise despite injury or other medical complications.
 Individuals with bulimia nervosa place an excessive emphasis on body shape or weight in
 their self-evaluation, and these factors are typically extremely important in determining self
esteem (Criterion D). Individuals with this disorder may closely resemble those with anorexia
 nervosa in their fear of gaining weight, in their desire to lose weight, and in the level of
 dissatisfaction with their bodies. However, a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should not be given
 when the disturbance occurs only during episodes of anorexia nervosa (Criterion E).
 Associated Features
 Individuals with bulimia nervosa typically are within the normal weight or overweight range
 (body mass index [BMI] ≥ 18.5 and < 30 in adults). The disorder occurs but is uncommon
 among obese individuals. Between eating binges, individuals with bulimia nervosa typically
 restrict their total caloric consumption and preferentially select low-calorie (“diet”) foods while
 avoiding foods that they perceive to be fattening or likely to trigger a binge.
 Menstrual irregularity or amenorrhea often occurs among females with bulimia nervosa; it is
 uncertain whether such disturbances are related to weight fluctuations, to nutritional deficiencies,
 or to emotional distress. The fluid and electrolyte disturbances resulting from the purging
 behavior are sometimes sufficiently severe to constitute medically serious problems. Rare but
 potentially fatal complications include esophageal tears, gastric rupture, and cardiac arrhythmias.
 Serious cardiac and skeletal myopathies have been reported among individuals following
 repeated use of syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting. Individuals who chronically abuse laxatives
 may become dependent on their use to stimulate bowel movements. Gastrointestinal symptoms
 are commonly associated with bulimia nervosa, and rectal prolapse has also been reported among
individuals with this disorder.
 Prevalence
 According to two U.S. epidemiological studies conducted in adult community samples, the 12
month prevalence of bulimia nervosa ranges from 0.14% to 0.3%, with much higher
 390
 rates in women than in men (0.22% to 0.5% in women; 0.05% to 0.1% in men), and the lifetime
 prevalence ranges from 0.28% to 1.0% (0.46% to 1.5% in women; 0.05% to 0.08% in men). In
 one study of adolescents ages 13–18, lifetime prevalence rates were 1.3% and 0.5% in girls and
 boys, respectively.
 In the United States, the prevalence of bulimia nervosa is similar across U.S. ethnoracial
 groups. The reported prevalence of bulimia nervosa is highest in populations residing in high
income industrialized countries, such as the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and
 many European countries; in most of these countries the prevalence of bulimia nervosa is
 roughly comparable.
 The prevalence of bulimia nervosa in some regions of Latin America and the Middle East is
 similar to the prevalence in most high-income countries. The prevalence of bulimia nervosa
 appears to be gradually increasing in many low- and middle-income countries.
 Development and Course
 Bulimia nervosa commonly begins in adolescence or young adulthood. Onset before puberty or
 after age 40 is uncommon. The binge eating frequently begins during or after an episode of
 dieting to lose weight. Experiencing multiple stressful life events also can precipitate onset of
 bulimia nervosa.
 Disturbed eating behavior persists for at least several years in a high percentage of clinical
 samples. The course may be chronic or intermittent, with periods of remission alternating with
 recurrences of binge eating. However, over longer-term follow-up, the symptoms of many
 individuals appear to diminish with or without treatment, although treatment clearly impacts
 outcome. Periods of remission longer than 1 year are associated with better long-term outcome.
 Significantly elevated risk for mortality (all-cause and suicide) has been reported for
 individuals with bulimia nervosa. The crude mortality rate (ratio of the number of deaths during
 the year to the average population in that year) for bulimia nervosa is nearly 2% per decade.
 Diagnostic crossover from initial bulimia nervosa to anorexia nervosa occurs in a minority of
 cases (10%–15%). Individuals who do experience crossover to anorexia nervosa commonly will
 revert back to bulimia nervosa or have multiple occurrences of crossovers between these
 disorders. A subset of individuals with bulimia nervosa continue to binge eat but no longer
 engage in inappropriate compensatory behaviors, and therefore their symptoms meet criteria for
 binge-eating disorder or other specified eating disorder. Diagnosis should be based on the current
 (i.e., past 3 months) clinical presentation.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Weight concerns, low self-esteem, depressive symptoms, social anxiety disorder,
and childhood generalized anxiety disorder are associated with increased risk for the
 development of bulimia nervosa.
 Environmental.
 Internalization of a thin body ideal has been found to increase risk for developing
 weight concerns, which in turn increases risk for the development of bulimia nervosa.
 Individuals who experienced childhood sexual or physical abuse are at increased risk for
 developing bulimia nervosa.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Childhood obesity and early pubertal maturation increase risk for
 bulimia nervosa. Familial transmission of bulimia nervosa may be present, as well as genetic
 vulnerabilities for the disorder.
 Course modifiers.
 bulimia nervosa.
 Severity of psychiatric comorbidity predicts worse long-term outcome of
 391
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Although data show that community-based prevalence of bulimia nervosa does not differ
 significantly across U.S. ethnoracial groups, treatment utilization for bulimia nervosa is lower
 among underserved U.S. ethnic and racialized groups than among the non-Latinx White
 population.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Bulimia nervosa is much more common in girls and women than in boys and men. Boys and men
 are especially underrepresented in treatment-seeking samples, for reasons that have not yet been
 systematically examined.
 Diagnostic Markers
 No specific diagnostic test for bulimia nervosa currently exists. However, several laboratory
 abnormalities may occur as a consequence of purging and may increase diagnostic certainty.
 These include fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypokalemia (which can provoke
 cardiac arrhythmias), hypochloremia, and hyponatremia. The loss of gastric acid through
 vomiting may produce a metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), and the frequent
 induction of diarrhea or dehydration through laxative and diuretic abuse can cause metabolic
 acidosis. Some individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit mildly elevated levels of serum amylase,
 probably reflecting an increase in the salivary isoenzyme.
 Physical examination usually yields no physical findings. However, inspection of the mouth
 may reveal significant and permanent loss of dental enamel, especially from lingual surfaces of
 the front teeth because of recurrent vomiting. These teeth may become chipped and appear
 ragged and “moth-eaten.” There may also be an increased frequency of dental caries. In some
 individuals, the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, may become notably enlarged.
 Individuals who induce vomiting by manually stimulating the gag reflex may develop calluses or
 scars on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated contact with the teeth. Serious cardiac and
 skeletal myopathies have been reported among individuals following repeated use of syrup of
 ipecac to induce vomiting.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Suicide risk is elevated in bulimia nervosa. A review found that approximately one-quarter to
 one-third of individuals with bulimia nervosa have had suicidal ideation, and a similar proportion
 have attempted suicide.
 Functional Consequences of Bulimia Nervosa
 Individuals with bulimia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated with
 the disorder and have reduced health-related quality of life. A minority of individuals report
 severe role impairment, with the social-life domain most likely to be adversely affected by
 bulimia nervosa.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type.
 Individuals whose binge-eating behavior occurs only
 during episodes of anorexia nervosa are given the diagnosis anorexia nervosa, binge
eating/purging type, and should not be given the additional diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. For
 individuals with an initial diagnosis of anorexia nervosa who binge and purge but whose
 presentation no longer meets the full criteria for anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type
 (e.g., when weight is normal), a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should be given only when all
 criteria for bulimia nervosa have been met for at least 3 months.
 392
 Binge-eating disorder.
 Some individuals binge eat but do not engage in regular inappropriate
 compensatory behaviors. In these cases, the diagnosis of binge-eating disorder should be
 considered.
 Kleine-Levin syndrome.
 In certain neurological or other medical conditions, such as Kleine-Levin
 syndrome, there is disturbed eating behavior, but the characteristic psychological features of
 bulimia nervosa, such as overconcern with body shape and weight, are not present.
 Major depressive disorder, with atypical features.
 Overeating is common in major depressive
 disorder, with atypical features, but individuals with this disorder do not engage in inappropriate
 compensatory behaviors and do not exhibit the excessive concern with body shape and weight
 characteristic of bulimia nervosa. If criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses should be
 given.
 Borderline personality disorder.
 Binge-eating behavior is included in the impulsive behavior
 criterion that is part of the definition of borderline personality disorder. If the criteria for both
 borderline personality disorder and bulimia nervosa are met, both diagnoses should be given.
 Comorbidity
 Comorbidity with mental disorders is common in individuals with bulimia nervosa, with most
 experiencing at least one other mental disorder and many experiencing multiple comorbidities.
 Comorbidity is not limited to any particular subset but rather occurs across a wide range of
 mental disorders. There is an increased frequency of depressive symptoms (e.g., low self-esteem)
 and bipolar and depressive disorders (particularly depressive disorders) in individuals with
F50.81
 bulimia nervosa. In many individuals, the mood disturbance begins at the same time as or
 following the development of bulimia nervosa, and individuals often ascribe their mood
 disturbances to the bulimia nervosa. However, in some individuals, the mood disturbance clearly
 precedes the development of bulimia nervosa. There may also be an increased frequency of
 anxiety symptoms (e.g., fear of social situations) or anxiety disorders. These mood and anxiety
 disturbances frequently remit following effective treatment of the bulimia nervosa. The lifetime
 prevalence of substance use disorder, particularly alcohol use disorder or stimulant use disorder,
 is at least 30% among individuals with bulimia nervosa. Stimulant use often begins in an attempt
 to control appetite and weight. A substantial percentage of individuals with bulimia nervosa also
 have personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders, most frequently
 borderline personality disorder.