Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 There is a risk of misdiagnosing bipolar I disorder as unipolar
 depression because of the prominence of depression in the presentation of bipolar I disorder: 1)
 the first episode of bipolar disorder is often depressive, 2) depressive symptoms are the most
 frequent symptoms experienced across the long-term course of bipolar I disorder, and 3) the
 problem for which individuals typically seek help is depression. When the individual presents in
 an episode of major depression, it is therefore important to actively probe for a history of mania
 or hypomania. Factors that might indicate that the diagnosis is bipolar I disorder rather than
 major depressive disorder in an individual presenting with a current depressive episode include
 family history of bipolar disorder, onset of illness in early 20s, numerous past episodes, presence
 of psychotic symptoms, and a history of lack of response to antidepressant treatment or the
 emergence of a manic episode during antidepressant treatment (e.g., medication,
 electroconvulsive therapy).
 Other bipolar disorders.
 Bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder, and other specified bipolar and
 related disorder are similar to bipolar I disorder by virtue of their including
 149
 periods of hypomanic symptoms in their presentations but are differentiated from bipolar I
 disorder by the absence of any manic episodes.
 Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, or other anxiety
 disorders.
 A
 careful history of symptoms is needed to differentiate generalized anxiety disorder from bipolar
 disorder, as anxious ruminations may be mistaken for racing thoughts (and vice versa), and
 efforts to minimize anxious feelings may be taken as impulsive behavior. Similarly, symptoms of
 posttraumatic stress disorder need to be differentiated from bipolar disorder. It is helpful to
 assess the episodic nature of the symptoms described (classical bipolar I is episodic), as well as
 to consider symptom triggers, in making this differential diagnosis.
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition should be made instead of bipolar I disorder if the
 manic episodes are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination, to be
 the direct physiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s disease,
 multiple sclerosis).
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced bipolar
 and related disorder is distinguished from bipolar I disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
 stimulants, phencyclidine) or medication (e.g., steroids) is judged to be etiologically related to
 the manic episode. Because individuals with a manic episode have a tendency to overuse
 substances during an episode, it is important to determine whether the substance use is a
 consequence of a primary manic episode or whether the manic-like episode has been caused by
 the substance use. In some cases, a definitive diagnosis may involve establishing that the manic
 symptoms remain once the individual is no longer using the substance. Note that manic episodes
 emerging in the context of treatment with an antidepressant medication but that persist at a fully
 syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of the medication warrant a diagnosis of bipolar
 I disorder rather than substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by periods in which manic and
 major depressive episodes are concurrent with the active phase symptoms of schizophrenia and
 periods in which delusions or hallucinations occur for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a manic
 or major depressive episode. The diagnosis is “bipolar I disorder, with psychotic features” if the
 psychotic symptoms have occurred exclusively during manic and major depressive episodes.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by
 persistent symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity, which may resemble the
 symptoms of a manic episode (e.g., distractibility, increased activity, impulsive behavior) and
 have their onset by age 12. In contrast, the symptoms of mania in bipolar I disorder occur in
 distinct episodes and typically begin in late adolescence or early adulthood.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 In individuals with severe irritability, particularly children
 and adolescents, care must be taken to apply the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder only to those who
 have had a clear episode of mania or hypomania—that is, a distinct time period, of the required
 duration, during which the irritability was clearly different from the individual’s baseline and
 was accompanied by the onset of the other characteristic symptoms of mania (e.g., grandiosity,
 decreased need for sleep, pressured speech, involvement in activities with a high potential for
 painful consequences). When a child’s irritability is persistent and particularly severe, the
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder would be more appropriate. Indeed, when
 any child is being assessed for mania, it is essential that the symptoms represent a clear change
 from the child’s typical behavior.
 150
 Personality disorders.
 Personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder may have
 substantial symptomatic overlap with bipolar I disorder, since mood lability and impulsivity are
 common in both conditions. In order to make a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, symptoms of
 mood lability and impulsivity must represent a distinct episode of illness, or there must be a
 noticeable increase in these symptoms over the individual’s baseline in order to justify an
 additional diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.


