Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 Major depressive disorder is characterized by the absence of both
 manic episodes and hypomanic episodes. Given that the presence of some manic or hypomanic
symptoms (e.g., fewer symptoms or shorter duration than required for hypomania) may still be
 compatible with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, it is important to ascertain whether the
 symptoms meet criteria for a hypomanic episode to determine whether it is more appropriate to
 make the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. Depressive episodes dominate the overall course of
 illness for most individuals with bipolar II disorder, contributing to the decade-long lag between
 illness onset and the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. Because the diagnostic criteria for major
 depressive episode are identical in major depressive disorder and bipolar II disorder, the
 diagnosis of bipolar II disorder can be made only by eliciting information about at least one prior
 hypomanic episode in order to distinguish the bipolar II disorder from major depressive disorder.
 Cyclothymic disorder.
 In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous periods of hypomanic
 symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a hypomanic episode and numerous
 periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a major
 depressive episode. Bipolar II disorder is distinguished from cyclothymic disorder by the
 presence of one or more hypomanic episodes and one or more major depressive episodes.
 158
 Schizophrenia.
 Schizophrenia is characterized by active-phase psychotic symptoms that may be
 accompanied by major depressive episodes. The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made if no major
 depressive episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms. If they have
 occurred concurrently, the diagnosis of schizophrenia is made if the major depressive episodes
 have been present for only a minority of the time. The diagnosis is bipolar II disorder, with
 psychotic features, if the psychotic symptoms have occurred exclusively during major depressive
 episodes.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by periods in which depressive
 symptoms are concurrent with the active-phase symptoms of schizophrenia and periods in which
 delusions or hallucinations occur for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major depressive
 episode. The diagnosis is bipolar II disorder, with psychotic features, if the psychotic symptoms
 have occurred exclusively during major depressive episodes.
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of bipolar and related
 disorder due to another medical condition should be made instead of bipolar II disorder if the
 hypomanic episodes are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination,
 to be the direct physiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s disease,
 multiple sclerosis).
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced bipolar
 and related disorder is distinguished from bipolar II disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
 stimulants, phencyclidine) or medication (e.g., steroids) is judged to be etiologically related to
 the hypomanic and major depressive episodes. Because individuals with a hypomanic episode
 have a tendency to overuse substances during an episode, it is important to determine whether
 the substance use is a consequence of a primary hypomanic episode or whether the hypomanic
like episode has been caused by the substance use. In some cases, a definitive diagnosis may
 involve establishing that the hypomanic symptoms or depressive symptoms remain once the
 individual is no longer using the substance. Note that hypomanic episodes emerging in the
 context of treatment with an antidepressant medication but persisting at a fully syndromal level
beyond the physiological effect of the medication warrant a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder
 rather than substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be
 misdiagnosed as bipolar II disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms of
 ADHD, such as excessive talking, distractibility, and less need for sleep, overlap with the
 symptoms of hypomania. The double counting of symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar II
 disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether the symptoms represent a distinct
 episode and if the noticeable increase over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar II
 disorder is present.
 Personality disorders.
 The same convention as applies for ADHD also applies when evaluating an
 individual for a personality disorder such as borderline personality disorder because mood
 lability and impulsivity are common in both personality disorders and bipolar II disorder.
 Symptoms must represent a distinct episode, and the noticeable increase over baseline required
 for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder must be present. A diagnosis of a personality disorder
 should not be made during an untreated mood episode unless the lifetime history supports the
 presence of a personality disorder.
 Other bipolar disorders.
 Diagnosis of bipolar II disorder should be differentiated from bipolar I
 disorder by carefully considering whether there have been any past episodes of mania and from
 other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders by confirming the presence of fully
 syndromal hypomania and depression.


