Differential Diagnosis
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of bipolar and related
 disorder due to another medical condition is made when the mood disturbance is judged to be
 attributable to the physiological effect of a specific, usually chronic medical condition (e.g.,
 hyperthyroidism). This determination is based on the history, physical examination, and/or
 laboratory findings. If it is judged that the hypomanic and depressive symptoms are not the
 physiological consequence of the medical condition, then the primary mental disorder (i.e.,
 cyclothymic disorder) and the medical condition are coded. For example, this would be the case
 if the mood symptoms are considered to be the psychological (not the physiological)
 consequence of having a chronic medical condition, or if there is no etiological relationship
 between the hypomanic and depressive symptoms and the medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medication-induced
 depressive disorder.
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medication-induced
 depressive disorder are distinguished from cyclothymic disorder by the judgment that a
 substance/medication (especially stimulants) is etiologically related to the mood disturbance. The
 frequent mood swings in these disorders that are suggestive of cyclothymic disorder usually
 resolve following cessation of substance/medication use.
 Bipolar I disorder, with rapid cycling, and bipolar II disorder, with rapid cycling.
 Both disorders may
 resemble cyclothymic disorder by virtue of the frequent marked shifts in mood. By definition, in
 cyclothymic disorder the criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have
 never been met, whereas the bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder specifier “with rapid
 cycling” requires that full mood episodes be present.
 Borderline personality disorder.
 Borderline personality disorder is associated with recurrent, brief
 marked shifts in mood that may suggest cyclothymic disorder. Engagement in potentially self
damaging behaviors can be seen in both conditions but would need to occur in the context of
 other hypomanic symptoms to be related to cyclothymia. Mood instability in borderline
 personality disorder occurs in the domains of anxiety, irritability, and sadness, whereas elation,
 euphoria, and/or increased energy are not characteristic features of borderline personality
 disorder. If the criteria are met for both disorders, both borderline personality disorder and
 cyclothymic disorder may be diagnosed.


