Differential Diagnosis
 Normal appearance concerns and clearly noticeable physical defects.
 Body 
dysmorphic 
disorder
 differs from normal appearance concerns in being characterized by excessive appearance-related
 preoccupations and repetitive behaviors that are time-consuming, are usually difficult to resist or
 control, and cause clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning. Physical defects
 that are clearly noticeable (i.e., not slight) are not diagnosed as body dysmorphic disorder.
 However, skin picking as a symptom of body dysmorphic disorder can cause noticeable skin
 lesions and scarring; in such cases, body dysmorphic disorder should be diagnosed.
 Eating disorders.
 In an individual with an eating disorder, concerns about being fat or overweight
 are considered a symptom of the eating disorder rather than body dysmorphic disorder. However,
 weight concerns may occur in body dysmorphic disorder. Eating disorders and body dysmorphic
 disorder can be comorbid, in which case both should be diagnosed.
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 The preoccupations and repetitive behaviors of
 body dysmorphic disorder differ from obsessions and compulsions in OCD in that the former
 focus only on physical appearance. These disorders have other differences, such as poorer
 insight, more frequent depression, and higher rates of suicidal
 276
 ideation in body dysmorphic disorder. When skin picking is intended to improve the appearance
 of perceived skin defects, body dysmorphic disorder, rather than excoriation (skin-picking)
 disorder, is diagnosed. When hair removal (plucking, pulling, or other types of removal) is
 intended to improve perceived defects in the appearance of facial, head, or body hair, body
 dysmorphic disorder is diagnosed rather than trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are not preoccupied with
 having or acquiring a serious illness and in clinical samples do not have particularly elevated
 levels of somatization.
 Major depressive disorder.
 The prominent preoccupation with appearance and excessive repetitive
 behaviors in body dysmorphic disorder differentiate it from major depressive disorder. However,
 major depressive disorder and depressive symptoms are common in individuals with body
 dysmorphic disorder, often appearing to be secondary to the distress and impairment that body
 dysmorphic disorder causes. Body dysmorphic disorder should be diagnosed in depressed
 individuals if diagnostic criteria for body dysmorphic disorder are met.
 Anxiety disorders.
 Social anxiety and avoidance are common in body dysmorphic disorder.
However, unlike social anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, and avoidant personality disorder, body
 dysmorphic disorder includes prominent appearance-related preoccupation, which may be
 delusional, and repetitive behaviors. In addition, the social anxiety and avoidance that are
 characteristic of body dysmorphic disorder are attributable to concerns about perceived
 appearance defects and the belief or fear that other people will consider these individuals ugly,
 ridicule them, or reject them because of their physical features. Unlike generalized anxiety
 disorder, anxiety and worry in body dysmorphic disorder focus on perceived appearance flaws.
 Psychotic disorders.
 Many individuals with body dysmorphic disorder have delusional
 appearance beliefs (i.e., complete conviction that their view of their perceived defects is
 accurate), which is diagnosed as body dysmorphic disorder, with absent insight/delusional
 beliefs, not as delusional disorder. Appearance-related ideas or delusions of reference are
 common in body dysmorphic disorder (i.e., thinking that other people take special notice in a
 negative way because of the individual’s appearance). However, unlike schizophrenia or
 schizoaffective disorder, body dysmorphic disorder involves prominent appearance
 preoccupations and related repetitive behaviors; disorganized behavior and other psychotic
 symptoms are absent (except for appearance beliefs, which may be delusional). For individuals
 whose obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms warrant the “with absent
 insight/delusional beliefs” specifier, these symptoms should not be diagnosed as a psychotic
 disorder.
 Other disorders and symptoms.
 Body dysmorphic disorder should not be diagnosed if the
 preoccupation is limited to discomfort with or a desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or
 secondary sex characteristics in an individual with gender dysphoria. Nor should body
 dysmorphic disorder be diagnosed if the preoccupation focuses on the belief that one emits a foul
 or offensive body odor as in olfactory reference disorder (olfactory reference syndrome), which
 is an example of an other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder in DSM-5. Body
 integrity dysphoria (which is included in ICD-11 but not DSM-5) involves a persistent desire to
 become an amputee in order to correct a mismatch between the individual’s sense of how his or
 her body should be configured and his or her actual anatomical configuration. In contrast to body
 dysmorphic disorder, the individual does not feel that the limb to be amputated is ugly or
 defective in any way, just that it should not be there. Koro, a culturally related disorder that
 usually occurs in epidemics in Southeastern Asia, consists of a fear that the penis (labia, nipples,
 or breasts in females) is shrinking or retracting and will disappear into the abdomen, often
 accompanied by a belief that death
 277
 will result. Koro differs from body dysmorphic disorder in several ways, including a focus on
 death rather than preoccupation with perceived ugliness. Dysmorphic concern (which is not a
 DSM-5 disorder) is a broader construct that is similar to, but not equivalent to, body dysmorphic
 disorder. It involves symptoms reflecting an overconcern with slight or imagined flaws in
 appearance.



 