Differential Diagnosis
 Psychotic disorder.
 Skin picking may occur in response to a delusion (i.e., parasitosis) or tactile
 hallucination (i.e., formication) in a psychotic disorder. In such cases, excoriation disorder
 should not be diagnosed.
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Excessive washing compulsions in response to
 contamination obsessions in individuals with OCD may lead to skin lesions, and skin picking
 may occur in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder who pick their skin because of
 appearance concerns; in such cases, excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. The
 description of other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder in other specified obsessive
compulsive and related disorder excludes individuals whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria
 for excoriation disorder.
 Neurodevelopmental disorders.
 While stereotypic movement disorder may be characterized by
 repetitive self-injurious behavior, onset is in the early developmental period. For example,
 individuals with the neurogenetic condition Prader-Willi syndrome may have early onset of skin
 picking, and their symptoms may meet criteria for stereotypic movement disorder. While tics in
 individuals with Tourette’s disorder may lead to self-injury, the behavior is not tic-like in
 excoriation disorder.
 287
 Dermatitis artefacta.
 Dermatitis artefacta (also referred to as “factitious dermatitis”) is a term used
 in dermatology to refer to medically unexplained, presumably self-induced skin lesions that the
 individual denies any role in creating. Cases in which there is evidence of deception on the
 individual’s part concerning the skin lesions can be diagnosed as either malingering (if the skin
 picking is motivated by external incentives) or factitious disorder (if the skin picking occurs in
 the absence of obvious external rewards). In the absence of deception, excoriation disorder can
 be diagnosed if there are repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.
 Other disorders.
 Other medical conditions.
 Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily attributable
 to the intention to harm oneself that is characteristic of nonsuicidal self-injury.
 Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily
 attributable to another medical condition. For example, scabies is a dermatological condition
 invariably associated with severe itching and scratching. However, excoriation disorder may be
 precipitated or exacerbated by an underlying dermatological condition. For example, acne may
 lead to some scratching and picking, which may also be associated with comorbid excoriation
Substance/medication-induced disorders.
 disorder (so-called acne excoriée). The differentiation between these two clinical situations (acne
 with some scratching and picking vs. acne with comorbid excoriation disorder) requires an
 assessment of the extent to which the individual’s skin picking has become independent of the
 underlying dermatological condition.
 Skin-picking symptoms may also be induced by certain
 substances (e.g., cocaine), in which case excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. If such
 skin picking is clinically significant, then a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder should be considered.