Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are judged to be a
 direct consequence of another medical condition (Criterion E), such as traumatic brain injury,
 surgical resection for treatment of a tumor or seizure control, cerebrovascular disease, infections
 of the central nervous system (e.g., herpes simplex encephalitis), or neurogenetic conditions such
 as Prader-Willi syndrome. Damage to the anterior ventromedial prefrontal and cingulate cortices
 has been particularly associated with the excessive accumulation of objects. In these individuals,
 the hoarding behavior is not present prior to the onset of the brain damage and appears shortly
 after the brain damage occurs. Some of these individuals appear to have little interest in the
 accumulated items and are able to discard them easily or do not care if others discard them,
 whereas others appear to be very reluctant to discard anything.
 Neurodevelopmental disorders.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects
 is judged to be a direct consequence of a neurodevelopmental disorder, such as autism spectrum
 disorder or intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the
 accumulation of objects is judged to be a direct consequence of delusions or negative symptoms
 in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Major depressive episode.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects is
 judged to be a direct consequence of psychomotor retardation, fatigue, or loss of energy during a
 major depressive episode.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are judged to
 be a direct consequence of typical obsessions or compulsions, such as fears of contamination,
 harm, or feelings of incompleteness in obsessive-compulsive disorder
 281
 (OCD). Feelings of incompleteness (e.g., losing one’s identity, or having to document and
 preserve all life experiences) are the most frequent OCD symptoms associated with this form of
 hoarding. The accumulation of objects can also be the result of persistently avoiding onerous
 rituals (e.g., not discarding objects in order to avoid endless washing or checking rituals).
 In OCD, the behavior is generally unwanted and highly distressing, and the individual
 experiences no pleasure or reward from it. Excessive acquisition is usually not present; if
 excessive acquisition is present, items are acquired because of a specific obsession (e.g., the need
 to buy items that have been accidentally touched in order to avoid contaminating other people),
 not because of a genuine desire to possess the items. Individuals who hoard in the context of
 OCD are also more likely to accumulate bizarre items, such as trash, feces, urine, fingernail and
 toenail cuttings, hair, used diapers, or rotten food. Accumulation of such items is very unusual in
 hoarding disorder.
 When severe hoarding appears concurrently with other typical symptoms of OCD but is
 judged to be independent from these symptoms, both hoarding disorder and OCD may be
 diagnosed.
 Neurocognitive disorders.
 Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects is
 judged to be a direct consequence of a degenerative disorder, such as neurocognitive disorder
 associated with frontotemporal degeneration or Alzheimer’s disease. Typically, onset of the
 accumulating behavior is gradual and follows onset of the neurocognitive disorder. The
accumulating behavior may be accompanied by self-neglect and severe domestic squalor,
 alongside other neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as disinhibition, gambling, rituals/stereotypies,
 tics, and self-injurious behaviors.
 