Differential Diagnosis
 Anxiety disorders.
 Recurrent thoughts, avoidant behaviors, and repetitive requests for reassurance
 can also occur in anxiety disorders. However, the recurrent thoughts that are present in
 generalized anxiety disorder (i.e., worries) are usually about real-life concerns, whereas the
 obsessions of OCD usually do not involve real-life concerns and can include content that is odd,
 irrational, or of a seemingly magical nature; moreover, compulsions are usually present and
 usually linked to the obsessions. Like individuals with OCD, individuals with specific phobia
 can have a fear reaction to specific objects or situations; however, in specific phobia the feared
 object is usually much more circumscribed, and rituals are not present. In social anxiety disorder,
 the feared objects or situations are limited to social interactions or performance situations, and
 avoidance or reassurance seeking is focused on reducing feelings of embarrassment.
 Major depressive disorder.
 OCD needs to be distinguished from the rumination of major
 depressive disorder, in which thoughts are usually mood-congruent and not necessarily
 experienced as intrusive or distressing; moreover, ruminations are not linked to compulsions, as
 is typical in OCD.
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 In body dysmorphic disorder, the obsessions and
 compulsions are limited to concerns about physical appearance; and in trichotillomania (hair
pulling disorder), the compulsive behavior is limited to hair pulling in the absence of obsessions.
 Hoarding disorder symptoms focus exclusively on the persistent difficulty discarding or parting
 with possessions, marked distress associated with discarding items, and excessive accumulation
 of objects. However, if an individual has obsessions that are typical of OCD (e.g., concerns about
incompleteness or harm), and these obsessions lead to compulsive accumulation (e.g., acquiring
 all objects in a set to attain a sense of completeness or not discarding old newspapers because
 they may contain information that could prevent harm), a diagnosis of OCD should be given
 instead.
 Eating disorders.
 OCD can be distinguished from anorexia nervosa in that in OCD the obsessions
 and compulsions are not limited to concerns about weight and food.
 Tics (in tic disorder) and stereotyped movements.
 A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic
 motor movement or vocalization (e.g., eye blinking, throat clearing). A stereotyped movement is
 a repetitive, seemingly driven, nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g., head banging, body rocking,
 self-biting). Tics and stereotyped movements are typically less complex than compulsions and
 are not aimed at neutralizing obsessions. However, distinguishing between complex tics and
 compulsions can be difficult. Whereas compulsions are usually preceded by obsessions, tics are
 often preceded by premonitory sensory urges. Some individuals have symptoms of both OCD
 and a tic disorder, in which case both diagnoses may be warranted.
 Psychotic disorders.
 Some individuals with OCD have poor insight or even delusional OCD
 beliefs. However, they have obsessions and compulsions (distinguishing their condition from
 delusional disorder) and do not have other features of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder
 (e.g., hallucinations or disorganized speech). For individuals whose OCD symptoms warrant the
 “with absent insight/delusional beliefs” specifier, these symptoms should not be diagnosed as a
 psychotic disorder.
 Other compulsive-like behaviors.
 Certain behaviors are sometimes described as “compulsive,”
 including sexual behavior (in the case of paraphilias), gambling (i.e., gambling disorder), and
 substance use (e.g., alcohol use disorder). However, these behaviors differ
 271
 from the compulsions of OCD in that the person usually derives pleasure from the activity and
 may wish to resist it only because of its deleterious consequences.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
 Although obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
 and OCD have similar names, the clinical manifestations of these disorders are quite different.
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is not characterized by intrusive thoughts, images, or
 urges or by repetitive behaviors that are performed in response to these intrusive symptoms;
 instead, it involves an enduring and pervasive maladaptive pattern of excessive perfectionism
 and rigid control. If an individual manifests symptoms of both OCD and obsessive-compulsive
 personality disorder, both diagnoses can be given.

 