Differential Diagnosis
 Delirium.
 A separate diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another
 medical condition is not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a
 delirium. However, a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
 293
Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms)
 judged to be due to another medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (primary).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Associated feature of another mental disorder.
 Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder or unspecified obsessive
compulsive and related disorder.
 another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major neurocognitive
 disorder (dementia) if the etiology of the obsessive-compulsive symptoms is judged to be a
 physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the dementia and if obsessive
compulsive symptoms are a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
 If the presentation includes a mix of different types of symptoms, the specific mental disorder
 due to another medical condition depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical
 picture.
 If there is evidence of
 recent or prolonged substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal
 from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, a substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder should be considered. When a substance/medication-induced obsessive
compulsive and related disorder is being diagnosed in relation to drugs of abuse, it may be useful
 to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that
 occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) substance intoxication or withdrawal or
 after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/medication-induced obsessive
compulsive and related disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance
 used.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
 due to another medical condition should be distinguished from a primary obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder. In primary mental disorders, no specific and direct causative physiological
 mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be demonstrated. Acute-onset symptoms,
 late age at onset, or atypical symptoms suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the
 diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by a preoccupation with having
 or acquiring a serious illness. In the case of illness anxiety disorder, individuals may or may not
 have diagnosed medical conditions.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms may be
 an associated feature of another mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, anorexia nervosa).
 These diagnoses are given if it is unclear whether the obsessive-compulsive and related
 symptoms are primary, substance-induced, or due to another medical condition.
 