Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
 symptoms may occur in the context of substance intoxication and substance withdrawal. The
 diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific withdrawal will usually
 suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder either with onset during intoxication or with onset
 during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance
 withdrawal if the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms are judged to be in excess
 of those usually associated with intoxication or withdrawal and are sufficiently severe to warrant
 clinical attention.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance).
 Substance/medication
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is distinguished from a primary obsessive
compulsive and related disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors with respect
 to substances/medications. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence from the history, physical
 examination, or laboratory findings for use or intoxication. Substance/medication-induced
 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder arises only in association with intoxication, whereas a
 primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder may precede the onset of
 substance/medication use. The presence of features that are atypical of a primary obsessive
compulsive and related disorder, such as atypical age at onset of symptoms, may suggest a
 substance-induced etiology. A primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis is
 warranted if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (about 1 month or longer) after
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 Delirium.
 F06.8
 the end of the substance intoxication or the individual has a history of an obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder.
 If the obsessive
compulsive and related symptoms are attributable to another medical condition (i.e., rather than
 to the medication taken for the other medical condition), obsessive-compulsive and related
 disorder due to another medical condition should be diagnosed. The history often provides the
 basis for judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the other medical condition (e.g.,
 medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine whether the medication
 is the causative agent (in which case the symptoms may be better explained by
 substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder). If the disturbance is
 attributable to both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., obsessive
compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient
 evidence to determine whether the symptoms are attributable to a substance/medication or to
 another medical condition or are primary (i.e., attributable to neither a substance/medication nor
 another medical condition), a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified obsessive-compulsive
 and related disorder would be indicated.
 291
 If obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms occur exclusively during the
 course of delirium, they are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not
 diagnosed separately.
 