Differential Diagnosis
Normative hair removal/manipulation.
 Trichotillomania should not be diagnosed when hair removal
 is performed solely for cosmetic reasons (i.e., to improve physical appearance). Many
 individuals twist and play with their hair, but this behavior does not usually qualify for a
 diagnosis of trichotillomania. Some individuals may bite rather than pull hair; again, this does
 not qualify for a diagnosis of trichotillomania.
 284
 Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Individuals with OCD and symmetry concerns
 may pull out hairs as part of their symmetry rituals, and individuals with body dysmorphic
 disorder may remove body hair that they perceive as ugly, asymmetrical, or abnormal; in such
 cases a diagnosis of trichotillomania is not given.
 Stereotypic movement disorder.
 Stereotypic movement disorder can sometimes involve hair
pulling behavior. For example, a child with intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
 disability) or autism spectrum disorder may engage in stereotypic head banging, hand or arm
 biting, and hair pulling when frustrated or angry, and sometimes when excited. This behavior, if
 impairing, would be diagnosed as stereotypic movement disorder (co-occurring with intellectual
 developmental disorder or autism spectrum disorder) rather than trichotillomania.
 Psychotic disorder.
 Another medical condition.
 Individuals with a psychotic disorder may remove hair in response to a
 delusion or hallucination. Trichotillomania is not diagnosed in such cases.
 Trichotillomania is not diagnosed if the hair pulling or hair loss is
 attributable to another medical condition (e.g., inflammation of the skin or other dermatological
 conditions). Other causes of noncicatricial (nonscarring) alopecia (e.g., alopecia areata,
 androgenic alopecia, telogen effluvium) or cicatricial (scarring) (e.g., chronic discoid lupus
 erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, pseudopelade,
 folliculitis decalvans, dissecting folliculitis, acne keloidalis nuchae) should be considered in
 individuals with hair loss who deny hair pulling. Skin biopsy or dermoscopy can be used to
 differentiate individuals with trichotillomania from those with dermatological disorders.
 Substance-related disorders.
 Hair-pulling symptoms may be exacerbated by certain substances—
 for example, stimulants—but it is less likely that substances are the primary cause of persistent
 hair pulling.
 