Tobacco Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of tobacco use leading to clinically significant impairment
 or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12
month period:
 1. Tobacco is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
 intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 tobacco use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain or use tobacco.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco.
 5. Recurrent tobacco use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
 work, school, or home (e.g., interference with work).
 6. Continued tobacco use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of tobacco (e.g.,
 arguments with others about tobacco use).
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of tobacco use.
 8. Recurrent tobacco use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
 smoking in bed).
 9. Tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
 recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
 or exacerbated by tobacco.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of tobacco to achieve the desired
 effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 tobacco.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for tobacco (refer to Criteria A
 and B of the criteria set for tobacco withdrawal).
 b. Tobacco (or a closely related substance, such as nicotine) is taken to
 relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
 Specify if:
646
 In early remission: After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met for at least 3
 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
 “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were
 previously met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met at
 any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
 A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 On maintenance therapy: The individual is taking a long-term maintenance
 medication, such as nicotine replacement medication, and no criteria for tobacco
 use disorder have been met for that class of medication (except tolerance to, or
 withdrawal from, the nicotine replacement medication).
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to tobacco is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If a tobacco withdrawal or tobacco
induced sleep disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for tobacco use
 disorder. Instead, the comorbid tobacco use disorder is indicated in the 4th character
 of the tobacco-induced disorder code (see the coding note for tobacco withdrawal or
 tobacco-induced sleep disorder). For example, if there is comorbid tobacco-induced
 sleep disorder and tobacco use disorder, only the tobacco-induced sleep disorder
 code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid tobacco use
 disorder is moderate or severe: F17.208 for moderate or severe tobacco use
 disorder with tobacco-induced sleep disorder. It is not permissible to code a
 comorbid mild tobacco use disorder with a tobacco-induced sleep disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 Z72.0 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F17.200 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F17.201 Moderate, In early remission
 F17.201 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F17.200 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F17.201 Severe, In early remission
 F17.201 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 “On maintenance therapy” applies as a specifier to be added to “in remission” if the individual is
 both in remission and on maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environment” applies as a further
 specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e.,
 in early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained remission in a controlled
environment). Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails,
 therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units