Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 A variety of medical conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms
 of short duration. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or a delirium is diagnosed
 when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests that the
 delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological consequence of a specific medical
 condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, brain tumor) (see “Psychotic Disorder Due to Another
 Medical Condition” later in this chapter).
 Substance-related disorders.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, substance-induced
 delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psychotic disorder by the fact
 that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin) is judged to be
 etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic
 Disorder” later in this chapter). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug screen or a blood alcohol
 level, may be helpful in making this determination, as may a careful history of substance use
 with attention to temporal relationships between substance intake and onset of the symptoms and
 to the nature of the substance being used.
 Depressive and bipolar disorders.
 The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be made if the
 psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic symptoms occur
 exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode).
Other psychotic disorders.
 Malingering and factitious disorders.
 Personality disorders.
 F20.81
 If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the diagnosis
 is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder with psychotic
 features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or
 111
 unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
 symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder and
 schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted before 1
 month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention should be given to
 the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute exacerbations of
 schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
 An episode of factitious disorder with predominantly
 psychological signs and symptoms may have the appearance of brief psychotic disorder, but in
 such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced. When malingering
 involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence that the illness is being
 feigned for an understandable goal.
 In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial stressors
 may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usually transient and
 do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at least 1 day, an
 additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.
