Differential Diagnosis
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 If an individual with obsessive-compulsive disorder is
 completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true, then the
 diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delusional
 108
 beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder. Similarly, if an
 individual with body dysmorphic disorder is completely convinced that his or her body
 dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder, with
 absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional
 disorder.
 Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and psychotic disorder due to another medical
 condition.
 Individuals with these disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder.
 For example, simple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder
 would be diagnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced 
psychotic
 disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptomatology to delusional disorder but can be
 distinguished by the chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the
 delusional beliefs.
 Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder.
 Delusional disorder can be distinguished from
 schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other characteristic
 symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia. Furthermore, the quality of delusions can help
 distinguish between schizophrenia and delusional disorder. In schizophrenia, delusions show
 greater disorganization (the degree to which delusions are internally consistent, logical, and
 systematized), whereas in delusional disorder, they show greater conviction (the degree to which
 the individual is convinced of the reality of the delusion), greater extension (the degree to which
 the delusion involves various areas of the individual’s life), and greater pressure (the degree to
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder.
 F23
 which the individual is preoccupied and concerned with the expressed delusion).
 These disorders may be distinguished
 from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the
 delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions occur exclusively during mood
 episodes, the diagnosis is major depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. Mood
 symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be superimposed on delusional disorder.
 Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration of all mood episodes remains
 brief relative to the total duration of the delusional disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other
 specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by
 other specified depressive disorder, unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and
 related disorder, or unspecified bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.
 