Differential Diagnosis
 Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in
 the context of a delirium; a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to
 134
 another medical condition is not given if the delusions and/or hallucinations occur exclusively
 during the course of a delirium. On the other hand, a diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to
 another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild
 neurocognitive disorder if the delusions or hallucinations are judged to be a physiological
 consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder (e.g., psychotic
 disorder due to Lewy body disease, with delusions).
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 If there is evidence of recent or prolonged
 substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance or
 medication that can cause psychotic symptoms on withdrawal, or exposure to a toxin (e.g., LSD
 [lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxication, alcohol withdrawal), a substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder should be considered. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within
 4 weeks) of substance intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially
 indicative of a substance-induced psychotic disorder, depending on the character, duration, or
 amount of the substance used. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a
 medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another
 medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be given.
 Psychotic disorder.
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distinguished
 from a psychotic disorder that is not due to another medical condition (e.g., schizophrenia,
 delusional disorder, schizoaffective disorder) or a major depressive or bipolar disorder, with
 psychotic features. In psychotic disorders and in depressive or bipolar disorders, with psychotic
features, no specific and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical
 condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history
 of schizophrenia or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the
 diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that
 involve voices speaking complex sentences are more characteristic of schizophrenia than of
 psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. While certain symptoms suggest a medical or
 toxic etiology (e.g., visual or olfactory hallucinations, dreamlike quality of delusions [individual
 as uninvolved observer]), there are no pathognomonic signs or symptoms that unequivocally
 point clinicians either way. Visual hallucinations are not uncommon in schizophrenia or bipolar
 disorder, and olfactory hallucinations (e.g., unpleasant smells) are also consistent with a
 diagnosis of schizophrenia. Thus, clinicians should not give undue weight to any one particular
 hallucination alone when deciding between a psychiatric and a medical cause for
 psychopathology