Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features.
 The distinction between
 schizophrenia and major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features or with catatonia
 depends on the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the psychosis, and on
 the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If delusions or hallucinations occur
 exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode, the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar
 disorder with psychotic features.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major depressive
 or manic episode occur concurrently with the active-phase symptoms and that the mood
 symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
 Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder.
 These disorders are of shorter duration than
 schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symptoms. In
 schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in brief psychotic
 disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
 Delusional disorder.
 Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by the absence
 of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prominent auditory or
 visual hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, negative
 symptoms).
 Schizotypal personality disorder.
 Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished from
 schizophrenia by subthreshold symptoms that are associated with persistent personality features.
 Individuals 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder.
 with 
obsessive
compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder may present with poor or absent insight, and
 the preoccupations may reach delusional proportions. But these disorders are distinguished from
 schizophrenia by their prominent obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance or
 body odor, hoarding, or body-focused repetitive behaviors.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder may include flashbacks that have a
 hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilance may reach paranoid proportions. But a traumatic event
 and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event are required to
 make the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders.
 These disorders may also have symptoms
 resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective deficits in social
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and communication
 deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disorder or communication disorder must have
 symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent hallucinations or delusions
 for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophrenia as a comorbid condition.
 The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made
 only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the physiological effects of a
 substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a delirium or major or minor
 neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
 121
 but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent with
 those disorders.
 Individuals with substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia,
 but the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the
 chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the psychosis in the
 absence of substance use.
 