Differential Diagnosis
 Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 A wide variety of psychiatric and medical conditions
 can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms and must be considered in the differential
 diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. These include delirium; major neurocognitive disorder;
 substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocognitive disorder; bipolar disorders,
 with psychotic features; major depressive disorder, with psychotic features; depressive or bipolar
 disorders, with catatonic features; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality disorder; brief
 psychotic disorder; schizophreniform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional disorder; and other
 specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition.
 Other medical conditions and substance use can
 manifest with a combination of psychotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychotic disorder due
 to another medical condition needs to be excluded.
 Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders.
 Distinguishing schizoaffective disorder from
 schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features is often
 difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and
 Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar
 disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished
 from a major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features based on the presence of
 prominent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood
 episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, the psychotic
 features only occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative proportion of mood to
 psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis may change from and to
 schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and
 prominent major depressive episode lasting 4 months during the first 6 months of a chronic
 psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual
 symptoms persist over several years without a recurrence of another mood episode.) Achieving
 greater clarity about the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms over time and about
their concurrence may require collateral information from medical records and from informants.
 