Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal.
 Individuals intoxicated with stimulants, cannabis,
 the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alcohol or sedatives, may
 experience altered perceptions that they recognize as drug effects. If reality testing for these
 experiences remains intact (i.e., the individual recognizes that the perception is substance
 induced and neither believes in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is not substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or substance withdrawal, with perceptual
 disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxication, with perceptual disturbances). “Flashback”
 hallucinations that can occur long after the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as
 hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic
 symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol
 withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium
 and are not diagnosed separately. Delusions in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive
 disorder would be diagnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral
 disturbance.
 Independent psychotic disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced 
psychotic 
disorder 
is
 distinguished from an independent psychotic disorder, such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
 disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizophrenia spectrum
 and other psychotic disorder, or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
 disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms.
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition.
 A substance/medication-induced psychotic
 disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its
 onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if there is a
 withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with medical
 conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility
 that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical
 condition itself rather than the medication, in which case psychotic disorder due to another
 medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a
 judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication
 substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for that individual
 whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance
 is attributable to both a medical condition and substance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e.,
 psychotic disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic
 disorder) may be given.
 Other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
 The 
psychotic
 symptoms included in the diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psy-chotic disorder are
 limited to either delusions or hallucinations. Individuals with other
 131
substance-induced psychotic symptoms (e.g., disorganized or catatonic behavior; disorganized
 speech; incoherence or irrational content) should be classified in the category other specified or
 unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
 