Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The presence of persistent or recurrent experiences of depersonalization,
 derealization, or both:
 1. Depersonalization: Experiences of unreality, detachment, or being an
 outside observer with respect to one’s thoughts, feelings, sensations, body, or
 actions (e.g., perceptual alterations, distorted sense of time, unreal or absent
 self, emotional and/or physical numbing).
 2. Derealization: Experiences of unreality or detachment with respect to
 surroundings (e.g., individuals or objects are experienced as unreal,
 dreamlike, foggy, lifeless, or visually distorted).
 B. During the depersonalization or derealization experiences, reality testing remains
 intact.
 C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, medication) or another medical condition (e.g., seizures).
 E. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
 schizophrenia, panic disorder, major depressive disorder, acute stress disorder,
 posttraumatic stress disorder, or another dissociative disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of depersonalization/derealization disorder are persistent or recurrent
 episodes of depersonalization, derealization, or both. Episodes of depersonalization are
 characterized by a feeling of unreality or detachment from, or unfamiliarity with, the individual’s
 whole self or from aspects of the self (Criterion A1). The individual may feel detached from his
 or her entire being (e.g., “I am no one,” “I have no self”). He or she may
 344
 also feel subjectively detached from aspects of the self, including feelings (e.g.,
 hypoemotionality: “I know I have feelings, but I don’t feel them”), thoughts (e.g., “My thoughts
 don’t feel like my own,” “head filled with cotton”), whole body or body parts, or sensations (e.g.,
 touch, proprioception, hunger, thirst, libido). There may also be a diminished sense of agency
 (e.g., feeling robotic, like an automaton; lacking control of speech or movements). The
 depersonalization experience can sometimes be one of a split self, with one part observing and
 one participating, known as an “out-of-body experience” in its most extreme form. The unitary
 symptom of “depersonalization” consists of several symptom factors: anomalous body
 experiences (i.e., unreality of the self and perceptual alterations); emotional or physical numbing;
and temporal distortions with anomalous subjective recall.
 Episodes of derealization are characterized by a feeling of unreality or detachment from, or
 unfamiliarity with, the world, be it individuals, inanimate objects, or all surroundings (Criterion
 A2). The individual may feel as if he or she were in a fog, dream, or bubble, or as if there were a
 veil or a glass wall between the individual and the world around. Surroundings may be
 experienced as artificial, colorless, or lifeless. Derealization is commonly accompanied by
 subjective visual distortions, such as blurriness, heightened acuity, widened or narrowed visual
 field, two-dimensionality or flatness, exaggerated three-dimensionality, or altered distance or
 size of objects (i.e., macropsia or micropsia). Auditory distortions can also occur, whereby
 voices or sounds are muted or heightened. In addition, Criterion C requires that the symptoms
 cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
 areas of functioning, and Criteria D and E describe exclusionary diagnoses.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder may have difficulty describing their
 symptoms and may think they are “crazy” or “going crazy.” Another common experience is the
 fear of irreversible brain damage. A commonly associated symptom is a subjectively altered
 sense of time (i.e., too fast or too slow), as well as a subjective difficulty in vividly recalling past
 memories and owning them as personal and emotional. Vague somatic symptoms, such as head
 fullness, tingling, or lightheadedness, are not uncommon. Individuals may experience extreme
 rumination or obsessional preoccupation (e.g., constantly obsessing about whether they really
 exist, or checking their perceptions to determine whether they appear real). Varying degrees of
 anxiety and depression are also common associated features. Individuals with the disorder have
 been found to have physiological hyporeactivity to emotional stimuli. Neural substrates of
 interest include the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis, inferior parietal lobule, and
 prefrontal cortical-limbic circuits.
 Prevalence
 Transient depersonalization/derealization symptoms lasting hours to days are common in the
 general population. The 12-month prevalence of depersonalization/derealization disorder is
 thought to be markedly less than for transient symptoms, although precise estimates for the
 disorder are unavailable. In general, approximately one-half of all adults have experienced at
 least one lifetime episode of depersonalization/derealization. However, symptomatology that
 meets full criteria for depersonalization/derealization disorder is markedly less common than
 transient symptoms. One-month prevalence in the United Kingdom is approximately 1%–2%.
 Development and Course
 The mean age at onset of depersonalization/derealization disorder is 16 years, although the
 disorder can start in early or middle childhood; a minority cannot recall ever not having had the
 symptoms. Less than 20% of individuals experience onset after age 20 years and only 5% after
 age 25 years. Onset in the fourth decade of life or later is highly unusual.
 345
Onset can range from extremely sudden to gradual. Duration of depersonalization/derealization
 disorder episodes can vary greatly, from brief (hours or days) to prolonged (weeks, months, or
 years). Given the rarity of disorder onset after age 40 years, in such cases the individual should
 be examined more closely for underlying medical conditions (e.g., brain lesions, seizure
 disorders, sleep apnea). The course of the disorder is often persistent. About one-third of cases
 involve discrete episodes; another third, continuous symptoms from the start; and still another
 third, an initially episodic course that eventually becomes continuous.
 While in some individuals the intensity of symptoms can wax and wane considerably, others
 report an unwavering level of intensity that in extreme cases can be constantly present for years
 or decades. Internal and external factors that affect symptom intensity vary between individuals,
 yet some typical patterns are reported. Exacerbations can be triggered by stress, worsening mood
 or anxiety symptoms, novel or overstimulating settings, and physical factors such as lighting or
 lack of sleep.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder are characterized by
 harm-avoidant temperament, immature defenses, and both disconnection and overconnection
 schemata. Immature defenses such as idealization/devaluation, projection, and acting out result
 in denial of reality and poor adaptation. Cognitive disconnection schemata reflect defectiveness
 and emotional inhibition and subsume themes of abuse, neglect, and deprivation. Overconnection
 schemata involve impaired autonomy with themes of dependency, vulnerability, and
 incompetence.
 Environmental.
 There is a clear association between the disorder and childhood interpersonal
 traumas in a substantial portion of individuals, although this association is not as prevalent or as
 extreme in the nature of the traumas as in other dissociative disorders, such as dissociative
 identity disorder. In particular, emotional abuse and emotional neglect have been most strongly
 and consistently associated with the disorder. Other stressors can include physical abuse;
 witnessing domestic violence; growing up with a seriously impaired, mentally ill parent; or
 unexpected death or suicide of a family member or close friend. Sexual abuse is a much less
 common antecedent but can be encountered. The most common proximal precipitants of the
 disorder are severe stress (interpersonal, financial, occupational), depression, anxiety
 (particularly panic attacks), and illicit drug use. Symptoms may be specifically induced by
 substances such as tetrahydrocannabinol, hallucinogens, ketamine, MDMA (3,4
methylenedioxymethamphetamine; “ecstasy”), and salvia. Marijuana use may precipitate new
onset panic attacks and depersonalization/derealization symptoms simultaneously.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Volitionally induced experiences of depersonalization/derealization can be a part of meditative
 practices that are prevalent in many religious, spiritual, and cultural contexts and should not be
 diagnosed as a disorder. However, there are individuals who initially induce these states
 intentionally but over time lose control over them and may develop a fear and aversion for
 related practices. Cultural frameworks may affect the level of distress or perceived severity
 associated with uncontrolled depersonalization/derealization experiences by providing
 explanations for them (e.g., spiritual/supernatural causes), which may alleviate individuals’ fears
that they are “losing their mind.”
 Functional Consequences of Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
 Symptoms of depersonalization/derealization disorder are highly distressing and are associated
 with major morbidity. The affectively flattened and robotic demeanor that these
 346
 individuals often demonstrate may appear incongruent with the extreme emotional pain reported
 by those with the disorder. Impairment is often experienced in both interpersonal and
 occupational spheres, largely as a result of the hypoemotionality with others, subjective difficulty
 in focusing and retaining information, and a general sense of disconnectedness from life.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Although individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder can
 present with vague somatic complaints as well as fears of permanent brain damage, the diagnosis
 of depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by the presence of a constellation of
 typical depersonalization/derealization symptoms and the absence of other manifestations of
 illness anxiety disorder.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Feelings of numbness, deadness, apathy, and being in a dream are not
 uncommon in major depressive episodes. However, in depersonalization/derealization disorder,
 such symptoms are associated with further symptoms of the disorder. If the
 depersonalization/derealization clearly precedes the onset of a major depressive episode or
 clearly continues after its resolution, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder
 applies.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Some individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder
 can become obsessively preoccupied with their subjective experience or develop rituals checking
 on the status of their symptoms. However, other symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder
 unrelated to depersonalization/derealization are not present.
 Other dissociative disorders.
 In order to diagnose depersonalization/derealization disorder, the
 symptoms should not occur in the context of another dissociative disorder, such as dissociative
 identity disorder. Differentiation from dissociative amnesia and functional neurological symptom
 disorder (conversion disorder) is simpler, as the symptoms of these disorders do not overlap with
 those of depersonalization/derealization disorder.
 Panic attacks.
 increasingly 
Depersonalization/derealization is one of the symptoms of panic attacks,
 common 
as 
panic 
attack 
severity 
increases. 
Therefore,
 depersonalization/derealization disorder should not be diagnosed when the symptoms occur only
 during panic attacks that are part of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, or specific phobia. In
 addition, it is not uncommon for depersonalization/derealization symptoms to first begin in the
 context of new-onset panic attacks or as panic disorder progresses and worsens. In such
 presentations, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder can be made if 1) the
 depersonalization/derealization component of the presentation is very prominent from the start,
 clearly exceeding in duration and intensity the occurrence of actual panic attacks; or 2) the
depersonalization/derealization continues after panic disorder has remitted or has been
 successfully treated.
 Psychotic disorders.
 The presence of intact reality testing specifically regarding the
 depersonalization/derealization 
symptoms 
is 
essential 
to 
differentiating
 depersonalization/derealization disorder from psychotic disorders. Rarely, positive-symptom
 schizophrenia can pose a diagnostic challenge when nihilistic delusions are present. For example,
 an individual may complain that he or she is dead or the world is not real; this could be either a
 subjective experience that the individual knows is not true or a delusional conviction.
 Substance/medication-induced disorders.
 Depersonalization/derealization associated with the
 physiological effects of substances during acute intoxication or withdrawal is not diagnosed as
 depersonalization/derealization disorder. The most common precipitating substances are the
 illicit drugs marijuana, hallucinogens, ketamine, ecstasy, and salvia. In
 347
 about 15% of all cases of depersonalization/derealization disorder, the symptoms are precipitated
 by ingestion of such substances. If the symptoms persist for some time in the absence of any
 further substance or medication use, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder
 applies. This diagnosis is usually easy to establish since the vast majority of individuals with this
 presentation become highly phobic and aversive to the triggering substance and do not use it
 again.
 Traumatic brain injury.
 Depersonalization/derealization symptoms are typical in traumatic brain
 injury (TBI) but are distinguished from depersonalization/derealization disorder by onset of
 symptoms following TBI and the lack of other symptoms of depersonalization/derealization
 disorder.
 Dissociative symptoms due to another medical condition.
 Features such as onset after age 40 years or
 the presence of atypical symptoms and course in any individual suggest the possibility of an
 underlying medical condition. In cases with dissociative symptoms, it is essential to conduct a
 thorough medical and neurological evaluation, which may include standard laboratory studies,
 viral titers, an electroencephalogram, vestibular testing, visual testing, sleep studies, and/or brain
 imaging. When the suspicion of an underlying seizure disorder proves difficult to confirm, an
 ambulatory electroencephalogram may be indicated; although temporal lobe epilepsy is most
 commonly implicated, parietal and frontal lobe epilepsy may also be associated.
 Comorbidity
 In a convenience sample of adults recruited for a number of depersonalization research studies,
 lifetime comorbidities were high for unipolar depressive disorder and for any anxiety disorder,
 with a significant proportion of the sample having both disorders. Comorbidity with
 posttraumatic stress disorder was low. The three most commonly co-occurring personality
 disorders were avoidant, borderline, and obsessive-compulsive.