 Dissociative Amnesia
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. An inability to recall important autobiographical information, usually of a
 traumatic or stressful nature, that is inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
 Note: Dissociative amnesia most often consists of localized or selective amnesia
 for a specific event or events; or generalized amnesia for identity and life history.
 B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., alcohol or other drug of abuse, a medication) or a neurological or other
 medical condition (e.g., partial complex seizures, transient global amnesia,
 sequelae of a closed head injury/traumatic brain injury, other neurological
 condition).
 D. The disturbance is not better explained by dissociative identity disorder,
 posttraumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorder, somatic symptom disorder,
 or major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 Coding note: The code for dissociative amnesia without dissociative fugue is F44.0.
 The code for dissociative amnesia with dissociative fugue is F44.1.
 Specify if:
 F44.1 With dissociative fugue: Apparently purposeful travel or bewildered
 wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or for other important
 autobiographical information.
 338
 Specifiers
 The specifier “with dissociative fugue” applies when dissociative amnesia occurs in the context
 of a dissociative fugue, which is characterized by apparently purposeful travel or bewildered
 wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or other important autobiographical
 information.
 Diagnostic Features
 The defining characteristic of dissociative amnesia is an inability to recall important
 autobiographical information that 1) should be successfully stored in memory and 2) ordinarily
 would be freely recollected (Criterion A). Dissociative amnesia is conceptualized as a potentially
 reversible memory retrieval deficit. In this way, among others, it differs from the amnesias
 attributable to neurobiological damage or toxicity that impair memory storage or retrieval.
 A variety of types of dissociative amnesia may manifest. In general, the memory deficit in
dissociative amnesia is retrograde and, except in rare cases, is not associated with ongoing
 amnesia for contemporary life events. Retrospective memory impairments include not only lost
 memories of traumatic experiences but also lost memories of everyday life during which no
 trauma occurred. Most commonly, individuals with dissociative amnesia report localized
 amnesia—a failure to recall events during a circumscribed period of time; and/or selective
 amnesia—the individual can recall some, but not all, of the events during a circumscribed period
 of time. In systematized amnesia the individual fails to recall a specific category of important
 information (e.g., fragmentary recall of home growing up, but continuous memory for school; no
 recall of a violent older sibling; lack of recall of a specific room in the individual’s childhood
 home). Individuals rarely overtly complain of symptoms of these forms of dissociative amnesia
 and attempt to minimize and rationalize the memory loss.
 Generalized dissociative amnesia involves a complete loss of memory for most or all of the
 individual’s life history. Individuals with generalized amnesia may forget personal identity (e.g.,
 a woman loses memory of her entire life history after giving in to repeated pressure from a close
 friend to engage in a sexual relationship), lose previous knowledge about the world (e.g., recent
 political events, how to use current technology), and less commonly lack access to well-learned
 skills (e.g., what contact lenses are and how to put them in). Generalized dissociative amnesia
 has an acute onset; the perplexity, disorientation, and purposeless wandering of individuals with
 generalized amnesia usually bring them to the attention of the police or psychiatric emergency
 services. Dissociative fugue is commonly associated with generalized dissociative amnesia and
 can be indicated by using the “with dissociative fugue” specifier. Generalized dissociative
 amnesia may be more common among combat veterans, sexual assault victims, and individuals
 experiencing extreme emotional stress or conflict. In continuous amnesia (i.e., anterograde
 dissociative amnesia), an individual forgets each new event as it occurs.
 Individuals with dissociative amnesia are frequently unaware (or only partially aware) of
 their memory problems. They may recall some traumatic events, or parts of traumatic events, but
 not others of the same type. Many, especially those with localized amnesia, minimize the
 importance of their memory loss and may become uncomfortable when prompted to address it.
 Associated Features
 Many individuals with dissociative amnesia are chronically impaired in their ability to form and
 sustain satisfactory relationships. Histories of trauma, especially child abuse, and victimization
 are common. Some individuals with dissociative amnesia report dissociative flashbacks (i.e.,
 behavioral reexperiencing of traumatic events). Many have a history of
 339
 nonsuicidal self-injury, suicide attempts, and other high-risk behaviors. Depressive and
 functional neurological symptoms are common, as are depersonalization, auto-hypnotic
 symptoms, and high hypnotizability. Sexual dysfunctions are common. Mild traumatic brain
 injury (TBI) may precede dissociative amnesia.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence for dissociative amnesia among adults in a small U.S. community
study was 1.8%.
 Development and Course
 Dissociative amnesia has been observed in young children, adolescents, adults, and geriatric
 populations. Amnesia in children younger than 12 may be the most difficult to evaluate because
 they often have difficulty understanding questions about amnesia, and interviewers may find it
 difficult to formulate child-friendly questions about memory and amnesia, especially in younger
 children. Observations of apparent dissociative amnesia are often difficult to differentiate from
 inattention, absorption, daydreaming, anxiety, oppositional behavior, and learning disorders.
 Reports from several different sources (e.g., teacher, therapist, case worker) may be needed to
 diagnose amnesia in children. Some traumatized adolescents with dissociative amnesia are less
 likely to come to clinical attention because of lower levels of posttraumatic stress disorder
 (PTSD) intrusive symptoms and less externalizing behavior. Dissociative fugue behavior in
 children and adolescents may be limited by the child’s life space (e.g., a child in a fugue “coming
 to” after bicycling to an unfamiliar neighborhood, a teenager finding herself having taken public
 transportation to a nearby town).
 Onset of generalized amnesia is usually sudden. Individuals may experience multiple
 episodes of this type of dissociative amnesia. A single episode may predispose to future
 episodes. In between episodes of amnesia, the individual may or may not appear to be acutely
 symptomatic. Some episodes of acute generalized amnesia resolve rapidly (e.g., when the
 individual is removed from combat or some other stressful situation, and/or is brought to clinical
 attention). A substantial subgroup of individuals develop highly impairing, debilitating, chronic
 autobiographical memory deficits, such that even “relearning” their life history does not
 ameliorate the memory loss.
 Removal from the traumatic circumstances generating acute, generalized dissociative
 amnesia (e.g., combat) may bring about a rapid return of memory. The memory loss of
 individuals with dissociative fugue may be particularly refractory. Later life trauma, life stresses,
 or losses may precede breakdown of long-standing autobiographical memory deficits related to
 childhood or adult trauma, with the onset of acute PTSD, mood disorders, substance abuse, and
 dangerousness to self or others, among other symptoms.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Severe, acute, or chronic traumatization is the main risk factor for dissociative
 amnesia. Cumulative early life trauma and adversities, especially physical and sexual abuse, are
 the major risk factors for dissociative amnesia for childhood and adolescence. More severe
 sexual abuse, multiple episodes of childhood sexual abuse, and sexual abuse by a relative,
 especially with betrayal by a close attachment figure, may increase the extent of childhood
 autobiographical memory disturbances. Individuals with dissociative amnesia may deny recall of
 specific childhood traumas (e.g., sexual assault), even those documented in medical or social
 service reports, although the individual can recall other similar traumatic events, both before and
 after the amnestic event. Severe cumulative adult trauma (e.g., repeated combat, trafficking,
 prisoner-of-war or concentration camp
 340
experiences) also may result in extensive localized, selective, and/or systematized dissociative
 amnesia. Generalized dissociative amnesia may be more common among individuals who have
 recently experienced extreme acute traumas (e.g., brutal military combat, rape, torture, often in
 the context of inability to escape) and/or a prior history of major social dislocation, asylum
seeking, or refugee status. Others develop generalized amnesia in the context of profound
 psychological conflict from which the individual also feels unable to escape. Virtually all
 individuals who develop generalized dissociative amnesia in the context of psychological
 conflict report past histories of severe early life and/or adult traumatization. Extreme acute
 traumatic experiences also may engender major psychological conflicts (e.g., a woman develops
 generalized amnesia after experiencing a brutal rape resulting in an unwanted pregnancy and
 becomes suicidal; on assessment, she reveals that her religion views abortion as murder and
 suicide as a major sin).
 Genetic and physiological.
 Quantitative genetic studies suggest that genetics account for about
 50% of the interindividual variance in dissociative symptoms, with nonshared, stressful
 environmental experiences accounting for most of the additional variance. Candidate gene
 studies suggest a gene x environment interplay with earlier and more chronic childhood
 traumatic experiences leading to significant increases in dissociative symptoms later in life.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In cultural contexts where possession is part of normative religious or spiritual practice,
 dissociative amnesia and fugue may be interpreted as resulting from pathological possession. In
 contexts or situations where individuals feel highly constrained by social circumstances or
 cultural traditions, the precipitants of dissociative amnesia often do not involve frank trauma.
 Instead, the amnesia may be preceded by severe psychological stresses or conflicts (e.g., marital
 conflict, other family disturbances, attachment problems, or conflicts attributable to restriction or
 oppression).
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Suicidal and other self-destructive behaviors are common in individuals with dissociative
 amnesia. The psychological forces producing generalized amnesia may be extreme, and suicidal
 thoughts, impulses, plans, and behavior are a risk when amnesia decreases. Case reports suggest
 that suicidal behavior may be a particular risk when the amnesia remits suddenly and
 overwhelms the individual with intolerable memories.
 Functional Consequences of Dissociative Amnesia
 Impairments in individuals with dissociative amnesia resulting from childhood/adolescent
 traumatization range from limited to severe. Some of these individuals may be chronically
 impaired in their ability to form and sustain satisfactory attachments. Some may become highly
 successful in occupational functioning but often do so by compulsive overwork. Individuals with
 acute generalized dissociative amnesia usually have impairment in all aspects of functioning. A
 substantial subgroup of individuals with generalized amnesia develop a highly impairing, chronic
 autobiographical memory deficit that even relearning their life history does not ameliorate. These
 individuals experience a highly debilitated, chronic course with poor overall functioning in most
domains of life.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Dissociative identity disorder.
 Recurrent episodes of dissociative amnesia may be attributable to
 dissociative identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative amnesia may report depersonalization
 and auto-hypnotic symptoms, as do individuals with dissociative
 341
 identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder report pervasive discontinuities
 in sense of self and agency, accompanied by many other dissociative symptoms. Amnesias in
 dissociative identity disorder, in addition to retrospective autobiographical memory deficits,
 include ongoing amnesia (“time loss”) for everyday events and interpersonal interactions;
 finding unexplained possessions; perplexing major fluctuations in skills and knowledge; and
 frequent, brief amnesic gaps during interpersonal interactions.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Some individuals with PTSD cannot recall part or all of a specific
 traumatic event (e.g., a rape victim who cannot recall most events for the entire day of the rape).
 When that amnesia extends to events beyond the immediate time of the trauma, a comorbid
 diagnosis of dissociative amnesia may be warranted. Individuals with the dissociative subtype of
 PTSD may also report dissociative amnesia in addition to depersonalization/derealization.
 Neurocognitive disorders.
 In major neurocognitive disorders, there is typically evidence of neural
 tissue damage accompanied by a decline in cognitive function with deficits in attention,
 executive function, learning and memory, language, and perceptual-motor and social cognition
 that impair capacity for independent everyday activities. Memory loss for personal information is
 usually embedded in cognitive, linguistic, affective, attentional, and behavioral disturbances.
 Generally, awareness of personal identity is spared until late in the course of the neurocognitive
 disorder. In neurocognitive disorders, retrograde amnesia is almost always accompanied by
 anterograde amnesia. Anterograde dissociative amnesia can be confused with delirium. However,
 medical, laboratory, toxicological, and neurological workups, including imaging studies, are
 normal. Careful, repeated evaluations over time will show that as in other forms of dissociative
 amnesia, there are no true neurocognitive deficits.
 Substance-related disorders.
 In the context of repeated intoxication with alcohol or other
 substances/medications, there may be episodes of “blackouts” or periods for which the individual
 has no memory, or partial memory (“grayouts”). To aid in distinguishing these episodes from
 dissociative amnesia, a longitudinal history should show that the amnestic episodes occur only in
 the context of intoxication. However, the distinction may be difficult when the individual with
 dissociative amnesia also misuses alcohol or other substances, particularly in the context of
 stressful situations that may also exacerbate dissociative symptoms. This can be a more complex
 differential diagnosis when the substance use begins in childhood or adolescence, generally in
 the context of intrafamilial abuse, neglect, and substance-related disorders. Sequential
 observation of these individuals after detoxification, along with carefully taken history, usually
 can distinguish the memory loss attributable to long-standing substance use from dissociative
 amnesia. Some individuals with comorbid dissociative amnesia and substance use disorders will
 attempt to minimize their dissociative amnesia and attribute memory problems solely to the
substance use. Prolonged use of alcohol or other substances may result in a substance-induced
 neurocognitive disorder that may be associated with impaired cognitive function. However, in
 this context the protracted history of substance use and the persistent deficits associated with the
 neurocognitive disorder would serve to distinguish it from dissociative amnesia, where there is
 typically no evidence of persistent impairment in intellectual functioning.
 Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury.
 Amnesia may occur in the context of a TBI when there
 has been an impact to the head or other mechanisms of rapid movement or displacement of the
 brain within the skull. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of consciousness, disorientation
 and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs and symptoms (e.g., abnormalities on
 neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder,
 visual field cuts, anosmia). A neurocognitive disorder attributable to TBI must present either
 immediately after brain injury occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness
 after the injury, and persist past the
 342
 acute postinjury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder following TBI is
 variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive function,
 learning and memory, as well as slowed speed of information processing and disturbances in
 social cognition. The patterns of memory deficits are typical of neurocognitive disorders. Mild
 TBI may precede acute dissociative amnesia presentations, but the dissociative memory deficits
 are out of proportion to the TBI head trauma and typically follow the dissociative, not the
 neurocognitive, patterns.
 Seizure disorders.
 Individuals with seizure disorders may exhibit complex behavior during
 seizures or postictally with subsequent amnesia. Some individuals with a seizure disorder engage
 in nonpurposive wandering that is limited to the period of seizure activity. Conversely, behavior
 during a dissociative fugue is usually purposeful, complex, and goal-directed and may last for
 days, weeks, or longer. Occasionally, individuals with a seizure disorder will report that some
 autobiographical memories have been “wiped out” as the seizure disorder progresses. Such
 memory loss is not associated with psychological trauma or adversities and appears to occur
 randomly. In seizure disorders, serial electroencephalograms usually show abnormalities.
 Telemetric electroencephalographic monitoring generally shows an association between the
 episodes of amnesia and seizure activity. Dissociative and epileptic amnesias may coexist.
 Memory deficits associated with electroconvulsive therapy.
 Memory deficits after electroconvulsive
 therapy (ECT) most commonly occur for the day of ECT administration. More extensive
 retrograde and even anterograde amnesia after ECT is usually unrelated to stressful or traumatic
 life epochs, and generally remits after the ECT series concludes. ECT in severely depressed
 individuals with dissociative disorders does not worsen dissociation, and memory access may
 improve as depression remits.
 Catatonic stupor.
 Mutism in catatonic stupor may suggest dissociative amnesia, but failure of
 recall is usually absent. Other catatonic symptoms (e.g., rigidity, posturing, negativism) are
 usually present. Catatonic symptoms in children can be associated with trauma, abuse, and/or
 deprivation. Unlike in dissociative amnesia, the pattern of memory loss in catatonia is only for
 the catatonic episode.
Acute dissociative reactions to stressful events (other specified dissociative disorder).
 The 
acute
 dissociative reactions to stressful events example of other specified dissociative disorder is
 characterized by a combination of dissociative symptoms that occur together acutely in response
 to stressful events and typically last less than 1 month. Amnestic episodes that occur as part of
 these reactions are accompanied by other prominent dissociative symptoms, have a short
 duration (hours or days), and tend to be circumscribed to limited periods or events in a person’s
 life (micro-amnesias).
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 There is no test, battery of tests, or set of procedures that
 invariably distinguishes dissociative amnesia from feigned amnesia. Feigned amnesia is more
 common in individuals with 1) acute, florid dissociative amnesia; 2) financial, sexual, or legal
 problems; 3) a wish to escape stressful circumstances; 4) a desire to seem to be a more
 interesting patient; and/or 5) a plan to engage in litigation for “recovered memories.” However,
 dissociative amnesia can be associated with those same circumstances and can coexist with
 deliberate feigning. Many individuals who malinger amnesia confess spontaneously or when
 confronted.
 Memory changes with aging or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 Memory 
decrements 
in 
mild
 neurocognitive disorder differ from those of dissociative amnesia; in mild neurocognitive
 disorder, memory changes manifest as difficulty in learning and retaining new information. This
 is often measured in tests of verbal learning of word lists or a brief story with evaluation of
 immediate and delayed recall. With normal cognitive aging, individuals may also have similar
 weaknesses in immediate and delayed recall of new information,
 343
 although normal aging may also affect information processing speed and other complex
 executive function tasks in addition to memory.
 Comorbidity
 As is common in individuals with a history of trauma, many comorbidities co-occur with
 dissociative amnesia, particularly as dissociative amnesia begins to remit. A wide variety of
 affective phenomena may surface, including dysphoria, grief, rage, shame, guilt, and
 psychological conflict and turmoil. Individuals may engage in nonsuicidal self-injury and other
 high-risk behaviors. These individuals may have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for
 persistent depressive disorder, major depressive disorder, or subthreshold depression (other
 specified depressive disorder). Many individuals with dissociative amnesia develop PTSD at
 some point during their life, especially when the traumatic antecedents of their amnesia are
 brought into conscious awareness. Many of these individuals may show symptoms of the
 dissociative subtype of PTSD. Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that
 meet diagnostic criteria for a comorbid somatic symptom and related disorder (and vice versa),
 particularly functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder). Substance-related
 and addictive disorders may be comorbid with dissociative amnesia, as well as feeding and
 eating disorders and sexual dysfunctions. The most common comorbid personality disorder is
 other specified personality disorder (with mixed personality disorder features), which often
 includes avoidant, obsessive-compulsive, dependent, and borderline features.
