 Dissociative Identity Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Disruption of identity characterized by two or more distinct personality states,
 which may be described in some cultures as an experience of possession. The
 disruption in identity involves marked discontinuity in sense of self and sense of
 agency, accompanied by related alterations in affect, behavior, consciousness,
 memory, perception, cognition, and/or sensory-motor functioning. These signs
and symptoms may be observed by others or reported by the individual.
 B. Recurrent gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information,
 and/or traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
 C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The disturbance is not a normal part of a broadly accepted cultural or religious
 practice.
 Note: In children, the symptoms are not better explained by imaginary playmates
 or other fantasy play.
 E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., blackouts or chaotic behavior during alcohol intoxication) or another
 medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
 331
 Diagnostic Features
 The defining feature of dissociative identity disorder is the presence of two or more distinct
 personality states or an experience of possession (Criterion A). The overtness or covertness of
 these personality states varies as a function of psychological motivation, current level of stress,
 cultural context, internal conflicts and dynamics, and emotional resilience, among other factors.
 Sustained periods of identity confusion/alteration may occur when psychosocial pressures are
 severe and/or prolonged. In those cases of dissociative identity disorder that present as the
 individual being possessed by external identities (e.g., spirits, demons) (possession-form
 dissociative identity disorder), and in a small proportion of non-possession-form cases,
 manifestations of alternate identities are readily observable. Most individuals with non
possession-form dissociative identity disorder do not overtly display, or only subtly display, their
 discontinuity of identity, and only a minority present to clinical attention with discernible
 alternation of identities. The elaboration of dissociative personality states with different names,
 wardrobes, hairstyles, handwritings, accents, and so forth, occurs in only a minority of
 individuals with the non-possession-form dissociative identity disorder and is not essential to
 diagnosis. In those cases where alternate personality states cannot be directly observed, the
 presence of distinct personality states can be identified by sudden alterations or discontinuities in
 the individual’s sense of self and sense of agency (Criterion A), and recurrent dissociative
 amnesias (Criterion B).
 Criterion A symptoms are related to discontinuities of experience that can affect any aspect
 of an individual’s functioning. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may report the
 feeling that they have suddenly become depersonalized observers of their own speech and
 actions, which they may feel powerless to stop (i.e., impaired sense of self and impaired sense of
 agency). These individuals may also report perceptions of voices (e.g., a child’s voice, voices
 commenting on the individual’s thoughts or behavior, persecutory voices and command
 hallucinations). In some cases, hearing voices is specifically denied, but the individual reports
 multiple, perplexing, independent thought streams over which the individual experiences no
 control. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may report hallucinations in all sensory
modalities: auditory, visual, tactile, olfactory, and gustatory.
 Strong emotions, impulses, thoughts, and even speech or other actions may suddenly
 materialize, without a sense of personal ownership or control (i.e., lack of sense of agency).
 Conversely, thoughts and emotions may unexpectedly vanish, and speech and actions are
 abruptly inhibited. These experiences are frequently reported as ego-dystonic and puzzling.
 Attitudes, outlooks, and personal preferences (e.g., about food, activities, gender identity) may
 suddenly shift. Individuals may report that their bodies feel different (e.g., like a small child, the
 opposite gender, different ages simultaneously). Alterations in sense of self and agency may be
 accompanied by a feeling that attitudes, emotions, and behaviors—even the individual’s own
 body—are “not mine” or are “not under my control.” Although most Criterion A symptoms are
 subjective, these sudden discontinuities in speech, affect, and behavior may be witnessed by
 family, friends, or the clinician.
 In most individuals with dissociative identity disorder, switching/shifting of states is subtle
 and may occur with only subtle changes in overt presentation. State switching may be more overt
 in the possession form of dissociative identity disorder. In general, the individual with
 dissociative identity disorder experiences himself or herself as multiple, simultaneously
 overlapping and interfering states.
 Dissociative amnesia (Criterion B) manifests in several major domains: 1) gaps in any aspect
 of autobiographical memory (e.g., important life events like getting married or giving birth, lack
 of recall of all school experiences before high school); 2) lapses in memory of recent events or
 well-learned skills (e.g., how to do one’s job, use a computer, cook or drive); and 3) discovery of
 possessions that the individual has no recollection of ever owning (e.g., clothing, weapons, tools,
 writings or drawings that he or she must have created).
 332
 Dissociative fugues, with amnesia for travel, are common. Individuals may report suddenly
 finding themselves in another city, at work, or even at home: in the closet, under the bed, or
 running out of the house. Amnesia in individuals with dissociative identity disorder is not limited
 to stressful or traumatic events; it can involve everyday events as well. Individuals may report
 major gaps in ongoing memory (e.g., experiencing “time loss,” “blackouts,” or “coming to” in
 the midst of doing something). Dissociative amnesia may be apparent to others (e.g., the
 individual does not recall something others witnessed that he or she did or said, cannot remember
 his or her own name, or may fail to recognize spouse, children, or close friends). Minimization or
 rationalization of amnesia is common.
 Possession-form identities in dissociative identity disorder typically manifest behaviorally as
 if a “spirit,” supernatural being, or outside person has taken control, with the individual speaking
 or acting in a distinctly different manner. For example, an individual’s behavior may give the
 appearance that her identity has been replaced by the “ghost” of a girl who died by suicide in the
 same community years before, speaking and acting as though she were still alive. The identities
 that arise during possession-form dissociative identity disorder present recurrently, are unwanted
 and involuntary, and cause clinically significant distress or impairment (Criterion C). However,
 the majority of possession states that occur around the world are usually part of a broadly
 accepted cultural or religious practice and therefore do not meet criteria for dissociative identity
 disorder (Criterion D).
Associated Features
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder typically present with comorbid depression,
 anxiety, substance abuse, self-injury, or another common symptom. Nonepileptic seizures and
 other functional neurological symptoms are prominent in some presentations of dissociative
 identity disorder, especially in some non-Western settings. Some individuals, especially in
 Western settings, may present with apparently refractory neurological symptoms, such as
 headaches, seizures, or symptoms suggestive of multiple sclerosis.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often conceal, or are not fully aware of,
 disruptions in consciousness, amnesia, or other dissociative symptoms. Many individuals with
 dissociative identity disorder report dissociative flashbacks during which they experience a
 sensory reliving of a previous event as though it were occurring in the present, often with a
 change of identity, a partial or complete loss of contact with or disorientation to current reality
 during the flashback, and a subsequent amnesia for the content of the flashback. Individuals with
 the disorder typically report multiple types of interpersonal maltreatment during childhood and
 adulthood. Other overwhelming early life events, such as multiple long, painful, early-life
 medical procedures, also may be reported. Nonsuicidal self-injury is frequent. On standardized
 measures, these individuals report higher levels of hypnotizability and dissociative symptoms
 compared with other clinical groups and healthy control subjects. Some individuals experience
 transient psychotic phenomena or episodes.
 Among personality features, avoidant personality features most often rate highest in
 individuals with dissociative identity disorder, and some individuals with dissociative identity
 disorder are so avoidant that they prefer to be alone. When decompensated, some individuals
 with dissociative identity disorder display features of borderline personality disorder (i.e., self
destructive high-risk behaviors, and mood instability). Many individuals with dissociative
 identity disorder display attachment problems but typically do not exhibit frantic activity to
 avoid being abandoned. Some have stable long-term relationships, albeit frequently
 dysfunctional and/or abusive ones, from which they may have difficulty extricating themselves.
 Obsessional personality features are common in dissociative identity disorder, more so than
 histrionic personality features. A subgroup of
 333
 individuals with dissociative identity disorder have narcissistic and/or antisocial personality
 features.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of dissociative identity disorder among adults in a small U.S.
 community study was 1.5%. Lifetime prevalence of dissociative identity disorder was 1.1% in a
 representative sample of community-based women in mid-eastern Turkey.
 Development and Course
 The disorder may first manifest at almost any age from early childhood to late life. Children
 usually do not present with identity shifting, instead presenting primarily with independently
 acting, imaginary companions, or as personified “mood” states (Criterion A phenomena).
Dissociation in children may generate problems with memory, concentration, and attachment,
 and may be associated with traumatic play. In adolescents, dissociative identity disorder
 commonly comes to clinical attention because of externalizing symptoms, suicidal/self
destructive behavior, or rapid behavioral shifts often ascribed to other disorders such as
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or childhood bipolar disorder. Some children with
 dissociative identity disorder can also be quite aggressive and irritable. Older individuals with
 dissociative identity disorder may present with symptoms that appear to be late-life mood
 disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, paranoia, psychotic mood disorders, or even cognitive
 disorders attributable to dissociative amnesia.
 Overt identity alteration/confusion may be triggered by many factors, such as later traumatic
 experiences (e.g., sexual assault), or even seemingly inconsequential stressors, like a minor
 motor vehicle accident. The experience of other major or cumulative life stressors may also
 worsen symptoms, including life events such as the individual’s children reaching the same age
 at which the individual was significantly abused or traumatized. The death of, or the onset of a
 fatal illness in, the individual’s abuser(s) is another example of an event that may worsen
 symptoms. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder are at high risk for adult interpersonal
 trauma such as rape, intimate partner violence, and sexual exploitation, including ongoing
 incestuous abuse into adulthood, as well as adult trafficking.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 In the context of family and attachment pathology, early life trauma (e.g., neglect
 and physical, sexual, and emotional abuse, usually before ages 5–6 years) represents a risk factor
 for dissociative identity disorder. In studies from diverse geographic regions, about 90% of the
 individuals with the disorder report multiple types of early neglect and childhood abuse, often
 extending into late adolescence. Some individuals report that maltreatment primarily occurred
 outside the family, in school, church, and/or neighborhoods, including being bullied severely.
 Other forms of repeated early-life traumatic experiences include multiple, painful childhood
 medical and surgical procedures; war; terrorism; or being trafficked beginning in childhood.
 Onset has also been described after prolonged and often transgenerational exposure to
 dysfunctional family dynamics (e.g., overcontrolling parenting, insecure attachment, emotional
 abuse) in the absence of clear neglect or sexual or physical abuse.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Twin studies suggest that genetics account for around 45%–50% of the
 interindividual variance in dissociative symptoms, with nonshared, stressful, and traumatic
 environmental experiences accounting for most of the additional variance. Several brain regions
 have been implicated in the pathophysiology of dissociative identity disorder, including the
 orbitofrontal cortex, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and amygdala.
 334
 Course modifiers.
 Ongoing sexual, physical, and emotional trauma often leads to significant
 difficulties in later functioning. Poorer outcome in adults is commonly related to severe
 psychosocial stressors, revictimization, ongoing sexual or physical abuse or exploitation,
 intimate partner violence, refractory substance use, eating disorders, severe medical illness,
 enmeshment with the individual’s abusive family of origin, or ongoing involvement in criminal
subgroups. Poorer functioning may also be related to perpetration of child maltreatment or
 intimate partner violence by individuals with dissociative identity disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Many features of dissociative identity disorder can be influenced by the individual’s
 sociocultural background. In settings where possession symptoms are common (e.g., rural areas
 in low- and middle-income countries, among certain religious groups in the United States and
 Europe), all or some of the fragmented identities may take the form of possessing spirits, deities,
 demons, animals, or mythical figures. Acculturation or prolonged intercultural contact may shape
 the presentation of the other identities (e.g., identities in India may speak English exclusively and
 wear Western clothes). Possession-form dissociative identity disorder can be distinguished from
 culturally accepted possession states in that the former is involuntary, distressing, and
 uncontrollable; involves conflict between the individual and his or her surrounding family,
 social, or work milieu; and is manifested at times and in places that violate cultural or religious
 norms. Combined dissociative-psychosis episodes may be more common in cultural contexts
 with marked communal violence or oppression and limited opportunity for redress.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Women with dissociative identity disorder predominate in adult clinical settings but not in
 child/adolescent clinical settings or in general population studies. Few differences in symptom
 profiles, clinical history, and childhood trauma history have been found in comparisons between
 men and women with dissociative identity disorder, except that women may have higher rates of
 somatization.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Suicidal behavior is frequent. Over 70% of outpatients with dissociative identity disorder have
 attempted suicide; multiple attempts are common, and other self-injurious and high-risk
 behaviors are highly prevalent. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder have multiple
 interacting risk factors for self-destructive and/or suicidal behavior. These include cumulative,
 severe early- and later-life trauma; high rates of comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
 depressive disorders, and substance use disorders; and personality disorder features. Dissociation
 itself is an independent risk factor for multiple suicide attempts. Greater severity of dissociative
 symptom scores is associated with a higher frequency of suicide attempts and nonsuicidal self
injury among individuals with dissociative disorders.
 Functional Consequences of Dissociative Identity Disorder
 Some children and adolescents with dissociative identity disorder may function poorly in school
 and in relationships. Others do well in school, experiencing it as a respite. In adults impairment
 varies widely, from apparently minimal (e.g., in high-functioning professionals) to profound. The
 symptoms of higher-functioning individuals may impair their relational, marital, family, and
 parenting functions more than their occupational and professional life, although the latter also
 may be affected. Many impaired individuals show improvement in occupational and personal
 functioning over time, while some individuals with dissociative
335
 identity disorder may be impaired in most activities of living and function at the level of chronic
 and persistent mental illness.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Dissociative amnesia.
 Both dissociative identity disorder and dissociative amnesia are
 characterized by gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information, or
 traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting. Dissociative identity disorder is
 distinguished from dissociative amnesia by the additional presence of identity disruption
 characterized by two or more distinct personality states.
 Depersonalization/derealization disorder.
 The essential feature of depersonalization/derealization
 disorder is persistent or recurrent episodes of depersonalization, derealization, or both.
 Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder do not experience the presence of
 personality/identity states with alterations of self and agency, nor do they typically report
 dissociative amnesia.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Most individuals with dissociative identity disorder endorse a lifelong
 negative posttraumatic emotional state, often with childhood onset, and their symptoms may
 appear to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode. Moreover, posttraumatic reactivity to
 times of year when trauma occurred (anniversary reactions), primarily manifesting with more
 despondency, distress, and suicidal ideation, may also appear to be major depressive disorder,
 with seasonal pattern. However, individuals with major depressive disorder or persistent
 depressive disorder do not experience dissociative fluctuations in self and agency and
 dissociative amnesia. It is important to assess if all or most identity states are experiencing the
 adverse mood state, since mood disorder symptoms may fluctuate because they are experienced
 in some identity states, but not others.
 Bipolar disorders.
 Dissociative identity disorder is commonly misdiagnosed as bipolar disorder,
 typically bipolar II disorder, with mixed features. The relatively rapid shifts in behavioral state in
 individuals with dissociative identity disorder—usually within minutes or hours—are atypical for
 even the most rapid-cycling individuals with bipolar disorders. These state alterations are due to
 rapidly shifting dissociative states and/or fluctuating posttraumatic intrusions. Sometimes these
 shifts are accompanied by rapid changes in levels of activation, but these usually last minutes to
 hours, not days, and are associated with activation of specific identity states. Elevated or
 depressed mood may be experienced as loculated in specific identities, through
 overlap/interference phenomena. Usually, the individual with dissociative identity disorder does
 not have a classic bipolar sleep disturbance (e.g., reduced need for sleep), instead suffering from
 chronic, severe nightmares and nocturnal flashbacks that interrupt sleep.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 A majority of individuals with dissociative identity disorder will
 have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for comorbid PTSD. Dissociative symptoms
 characteristic of dissociative identity disorder should be differentiated from the dissociative
 amnesia, dissociative flashbacks, and depersonalization/derealization characteristic of acute
 stress disorder, PTSD, or the dissociative subtype of PTSD. Dissociative amnesia in PTSD
 typically manifests only for specific traumatic events or aspects of traumatic events, as opposed
to the chronic, complex dissociative amnesia characteristic of dissociative identity disorder.
 Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in the dissociative subtype of PTSD are related to
 specific posttraumatic reminders. Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in dissociative
 identity disorder may occur not only in response to posttraumatic reminders, but also in an
 ongoing fashion in daily life, including in response to stressful interpersonal interactions and
 when there is overlap/interference between states.
 Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may
 experience symptoms that can superficially appear similar to those of psychotic
 336
 disorders. These include auditory hallucinations and symptoms characteristic of intrusions of
 personality states into the individual’s awareness; these symptoms can seemingly resemble some
 of the Schneiderian first-rank symptoms formerly considered indicative of schizophrenia (e.g.,
 thought broadcasting, thought insertion, thought withdrawal, hearing voices keeping up a
 running commentary about the individual). For example, hearing different personality states
 discussing the individual can resemble auditory hallucinations of voices arguing in
 schizophrenia. The individual with dissociative identity disorder may also experience the
 thoughts or emotions of an intruding personality state, which can resemble thought insertion in
 schizophrenia, as well as experience the sudden disappearance of these thoughts or emotions,
 which can resemble thought withdrawal. Such experiences in an individual with schizophrenia
 are usually accompanied by delusional beliefs about the cause of those symptoms (i.e., thoughts
 being inserted by an outside force), whereas individuals with dissociative identity disorder
 typically experience these symptoms as ego-alien and frightening. Individuals with dissociative
 identity disorder may also report a range of visual, tactile, olfactory, gustatory, and somatic
 hallucinations, which are usually related to autohypnotic, posttraumatic, and dissociative factors,
 such as partial flashbacks, in contrast to individuals with schizophrenia, whose hallucinations are
 primarily auditory and less commonly visual. Dissociative identity disorder and psychotic
 disorders are therefore distinguished by symptoms characteristic of one of these conditions and
 not the other (e.g., dissociative amnesia in dissociative identity disorder and not in psychotic
 disorders). Finally, individuals with schizophrenia have low hypnotic capacity, whereas
 individuals with dissociative identity disorder have the highest hypnotic capacity among all
 clinical groups.
 Substance/medication-induced disorders.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder frequently
 have a current or past history of substance use disorders. Symptoms associated with the
 physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts) should be distinguished from dissociative
 amnesia in dissociative identity disorder if the substance in question is judged to be etiologically
 related to the memory loss.
 Personality disorders.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often present identities that
 appear to encapsulate a variety of severe personality disorder features, suggesting a differential
 diagnosis of personality disorder, especially of the borderline type. Importantly, however, the
 individual’s longitudinal variability in personality style (attributable to inconsistency among
 identities) differs from the pervasive and persistent dysfunction in affect management and
 interpersonal relationships typical of those with personality disorders.
Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury.
 Both dissociative identity disorder and traumatic brain
 injury (TBI) are characterized by gaps in memory. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of
 consciousness, disorientation and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs and
 symptoms. A neurocognitive disorder due to TBI manifests either immediately after brain injury
 occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness after the injury, and persists
 past the acute postinjury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder
 following TBI is variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive
 function, and learning and memory, as well as slowed speed of information processing and
 disturbances in social cognition. While depersonalization is not uncommon following TBI, the
 additional neurocognitive features noted above help distinguish it from dissociative amnesia that
 is part of dissociative identity disorder. Moreover, dissociative amnesia occurring in the context
 of dissociative identity disorder is accompanied by a marked discontinuity in sense of self and
 sense of agency, which are not features of TBI.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 Functional neurological symptom
 disorder may be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder by the absence of identity
 alteration characterized by two or more distinct personality states or an
 337
 experience of possession. Dissociative amnesia in functional neurological symptom disorder is
 more limited and circumscribed (e.g., amnesia for a nonepileptic seizure).
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder usually do
 not report the subtle symptoms of intrusion characteristic of the disorder; instead they tend to
 overreport media-based symptoms of the disorder, such as dramatic dissociative amnesia and
 melodramatic switching behaviors, while underreporting less-publicized comorbid symptoms,
 such as depression. Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder tend to be relatively
 undisturbed by or may even seem to enjoy “having” the disorder, or may ask clinicians to “find”
 traumatic memories. In contrast, most individuals with genuine dissociative identity disorder are
 ashamed of and overwhelmed by their symptoms, deny the diagnosis, underreport their
 symptoms, and display minimization and avoidance of their trauma history.
 Individuals who feign the symptoms of dissociative identity disorder usually create limited,
 stereotyped alternate identities, with feigned amnesia related only to the events for which gain is
 sought, with apparent switching behaviors and amnesia only displayed while being observed.
 They may present an “all-good” identity and an “all-bad” identity in hopes of gaining
 exculpation for a crime.
 Comorbidity
 Disorders that are comorbid with dissociative identity disorder include PTSD, depressive
 disorders, substance-related disorders, feeding and eating disorders, obsessive-compulsive
 disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and other specified personality disorder with avoidant,
 obsessive-compulsive, or borderline personality traits. The most common forms of functional
 neurological symptom disorder include nonepileptic seizures, gait disturbances, and paralyses.
 Most commonly, nonepileptic seizures resemble grand mal seizures or complex partial seizures
 with temporal lobe foci; others may mimic absence or partial seizures.
