 Caffeine Withdrawal
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Prolonged daily use of caffeine.
 B. Abrupt cessation of or reduction in caffeine use, followed within 24 hours by
 three (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
 1. Headache.
 2. Marked fatigue or drowsiness.
 3. Dysphoric mood, depressed mood, or irritability.
 4. Difficulty concentrating.
 5. Flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness).
 572
 C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not associated with the physiological effects of
 another medical condition (e.g., migraine, viral illness) and are not better
 explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
 another substance.
Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of caffeine withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
 syndrome that develops after the abrupt cessation of (or substantial reduction in) prolonged daily
 caffeine ingestion (Criterion B). Because individuals may be unaware of the wide array of
 sources of caffeine beyond coffee, colas, and energy drinks (e.g., over-the-counter analgesics and
 cold remedies, weight loss aids, chocolate), they may not connect ingestion of these substances
 with symptoms of caffeine withdrawal. The caffeine withdrawal syndrome is indicated by three
 or more of the following (Criterion B): headache; marked fatigue or drowsiness; dysphoric
 mood, depressed mood, or irritability; difficulty concentrating; and flu-like symptoms (nausea,
 vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness). The withdrawal syndrome causes clinically significant
 distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
 C). The symptoms must not be associated with the physiological effects of another medical
 condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
 Headache is the hallmark feature of caffeine withdrawal and may be diffuse, gradual in
 development, throbbing, severe, and sensitive to movement. However, other symptoms of
 caffeine withdrawal can occur in the absence of headache. Caffeine is the most widely used
 behaviorally active drug in the world and is present in many different types of beverages (e.g.,
 coffee, tea, mate, soft drinks, energy drinks), foods, energy aids, medications, and dietary
 supplements. Because caffeine ingestion is often integrated into social customs and daily rituals
 (e.g., coffee break, tea time), some caffeine consumers may be unaware of their physical
 dependence on caffeine. Thus, caffeine withdrawal symptoms could be unexpected and
 misattributed to other causes (e.g., the flu, migraine). Furthermore, caffeine withdrawal
 symptoms may occur when individuals are required to abstain from foods and beverages prior to
 medical procedures or when a usual caffeine dose is missed because of a change in routine (e.g.,
 during travel, weekends).
 The probability and severity of caffeine withdrawal generally increase as a function of usual
 daily caffeine dose. However, there is large variability among individuals and within individuals
 across different episodes in the incidence, severity, and time course of withdrawal symptoms.
 Caffeine withdrawal symptoms may occur after abrupt cessation of relatively low chronic daily
 doses of caffeine (i.e., 100 mg).
 Associated Features
 Caffeine abstinence has been shown to be associated with impaired behavioral and cognitive
 performance (e.g., sustained attention), as well as with increased total sleep time, sleep
 efficiency, and slow-wave sleep. Electroencephalographic studies have shown that caffeine
 withdrawal symptoms are significantly associated with increases in theta power and decreases in
 beta-2 power. Decreased motivation to work and decreased sociability have also been reported
 during caffeine withdrawal. Increased analgesic use during caffeine withdrawal has been
 documented.
 Prevalence
 More than 85% of adults and children in the United States regularly consume caffeine, with adult
 caffeine consumers ingesting about 280 mg/day on average. The incidence and prevalence of the
caffeine withdrawal syndrome in the general population are unclear. In the United States,
 headache may occur in approximately 50% of cases of caffeine abstinence.
 573
 In attempts to permanently stop caffeine use, more than 70% of individuals in a U.S.
 metropolitan county reported at least one caffeine withdrawal symptom (47% experienced
 headache), and 24% experienced headache plus one or more other symptoms as well as
 functional impairment due to withdrawal. Among individuals who abstained from caffeine for at
 least 24 hours but were not trying to permanently stop caffeine use, 11% experienced headache
 plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional impairment. Caffeine consumers can
 decrease the incidence of caffeine withdrawal by using caffeine daily or only infrequently (e.g.,
 no more than 2 consecutive days). Gradual reduction in caffeine over a period of days or weeks
 may decrease the incidence and severity of caffeine withdrawal.
 Development and Course
 Symptoms usually begin 12–24 hours after the last caffeine dose and peak after 1–2 days of
 abstinence. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms last for 2–9 days, with the possibility of withdrawal
 headaches occurring for up to 21 days. Symptoms usually remit rapidly (within 30–60 minutes)
 after re-ingestion of caffeine. Doses of caffeine significantly less than the individual’s usual daily
 dose may be sufficient to prevent or attenuate caffeine withdrawal symptoms (e.g., consumption
 of 25 mg by an individual who typically consumes 300 mg).
 Caffeine is unique in that it is a behaviorally active drug that is consumed by individuals of
 nearly all ages, with rates of caffeine consumption and overall level of caffeine consumption
 increasing with age. Although caffeine withdrawal among children and adolescents has been
 documented, relatively little is known about risk factors for caffeine withdrawal among this age
 group. The use of highly caffeinated energy drinks is increasing in young people, which could
 increase the risk for caffeine withdrawal.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Heavy caffeine use has been observed among individuals with mental disorders,
 including eating disorders and alcohol and other substance use disorders, as well as among
 individuals who smoke cigarettes and those who are incarcerated. Thus, these individuals could
 be at higher risk for caffeine withdrawal upon acute caffeine abstinence.
 Environmental.
 The unavailability of caffeine is an environmental risk factor for incipient
 withdrawal symptoms. While caffeine is legal and usually widely available, there are conditions
 in which caffeine use may be restricted, such as during medical procedures, pregnancy,
 hospitalizations, religious observances, wartime, travel, and research participation. These
 external environmental circumstances may precipitate a withdrawal syndrome in vulnerable
 individuals.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Genetic factors appear to increase vulnerability to caffeine withdrawal,
 but no specific genes have been identified.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Habitual caffeine consumers who fast for religious reasons may be at increased risk for caffeine
 withdrawal.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Metabolism of caffeine is slower in females who use oral contraceptives and in the luteal phase
 of the menstrual cycle, and caffeine metabolism becomes progressively slower in the second and
 third trimesters of pregnancy compared with the first trimester and the nonpregnant state. These
 features reduce the rate of clearance and may diminish withdrawal, although they can also
 lengthen the duration of caffeine-associated adverse symptoms. It is unlikely that doses < 300
 mg/day are associated with adverse reproductive outcomes in pregnancy.
 574
 Functional Consequences of Caffeine Withdrawal
 Caffeine withdrawal symptoms can vary from mild to extreme, at times causing functional
 impairment in normal daily activities. Rates of functional impairment in studies conducted
 largely in the United States range from 10% to 55% (median 13%), with rates as high as 73%
 found among individuals who also show other problematic features of caffeine use. Examples of
 functional impairment include being unable to work, exercise, or care for children; staying in bed
 all day; missing religious services; ending a vacation early; and canceling a social gathering.
 Caffeine withdrawal headaches may be described by individuals as “the worst headaches” ever
 experienced. Decrements in cognitive and motor performance have also been observed.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions and medication side effects.
 Caffeine withdrawal can mimic migraine and
 other headache disorders, viral illnesses, sinus conditions, tension, other drug withdrawal states
 (e.g., from amphetamines, cocaine), and medication side effects. The final determination of
 caffeine withdrawal should rest on a determination of the pattern and amount consumed, the time
 interval between caffeine abstinence and onset of symptoms, and the particular clinical features
 presented by the individual. A challenge dose of caffeine followed by symptom remission may
 be used to confirm the diagnosis.
 Caffeine-induced sleep disorder.
 Caffeine withdrawal is distinguished from caffeine-induced sleep
 disorder (e.g., caffeine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type, with onset during withdrawal)
 because the sleep symptoms are in excess of those usually associated caffeine withdrawal,
 predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Comorbidity
 Caffeine withdrawal may be associated with major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety
 disorder, panic disorder, antisocial personality disorder, moderate to severe alcohol use disorder,
 and cannabis and cocaine use.