Specific Learning Disorder
Specific Learning Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Difficulties learning and using academic skills, as indicated by the presence of at
least one of the following symptoms that have persisted for at least 6 months,
despite the provision of interventions that target those difficulties:
1. Inaccurate or slow and effortful word reading (e.g., reads single words aloud
incorrectly or slowly and hesitantly, frequently guesses words, has difficulty
sounding out words).
2. Difficulty understanding the meaning of what is read (e.g., may read text
accurately but not understand the sequence, relationships, inferences, or
deeper meanings of what is read).
3. Difficulties with spelling (e.g., may add, omit, or substitute vowels or
consonants).
77
4. Difficulties with written expression (e.g., makes multiple grammatical or
punctuation errors within sentences; employs poor paragraph organization;
written expression of ideas lacks clarity).
5. Difficulties mastering number sense, number facts, or calculation (e.g., has
poor understanding of numbers, their magnitude, and relationships; counts on
fingers to add single-digit numbers instead of recalling the math fact as peers
do; gets lost in the midst of arithmetic computation and may switch
procedures).
6. Difficulties with mathematical reasoning (e.g., has severe difficulty applying
mathematical concepts, facts, or procedures to solve quantitative problems).
B. The affected academic skills are substantially and quantifiably below those
expected for the individual’s chronological age, and cause significant
interference with academic or occupational performance, or with activities of
daily living, as confirmed by individually administered standardized achievement
measures and comprehensive clinical assessment. For individuals age 17 years
and older, a documented history of impairing learning difficulties may be
substituted for the standardized assessment.
C. The learning difficulties begin during school-age years but may not become fully
manifest until the demands for those affected academic skills exceed the
individual’s limited capacities (e.g., as in timed tests, reading or writing lengthy
complex reports for a tight deadline, excessively heavy academic loads).
D. The learning difficulties are not better accounted for by intellectual disabilities,
uncorrected visual or auditory acuity, other mental or neurological disorders,
psychosocial adversity, lack of proficiency in the language of academic
instruction, or inadequate educational instruction.
Note: The four diagnostic criteria are to be met based on a clinical synthesis of the
individual’s history (developmental, medical, family, educational), school reports, and
psychoeducational assessment.
Coding note: Specify all academic domains and subskills that are impaired. When
more than one domain is impaired, each one should be coded individually according
to the following specifiers.
Specify if:
F81.0 With impairment in reading:
Word reading accuracy
Reading rate or fluency
Reading comprehension
78
Note: Dyslexia is an alternative term used to refer to a pattern of learning
difficulties characterized by problems with accurate or fluent word recognition,
poor decoding, and poor spelling abilities. If dyslexia is used to specify this
particular pattern of difficulties, it is important also to specify any additional
difficulties that are present, such as difficulties with reading comprehension or
math reasoning.
F81.81 With impairment in written expression:
Spelling accuracy
Grammar and punctuation accuracy
Clarity or organization of written expression
F81.2 With impairment in mathematics:
Number sense
Memorization of arithmetic facts
Accurate or fluent calculation
Accurate math reasoning
Note: Dyscalculia is an alternative term used to refer to a pattern of difficulties
characterized by problems processing numerical information, learning
arithmetic facts, and performing accurate or fluent calculations. If dyscalculia is
used to specify this particular pattern of mathematic difficulties, it is important
also to specify any additional difficulties that are present, such as difficulties
with math reasoning or word reasoning accuracy.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Some difficulties learning skills in one or two academic domains, but of
mild enough severity that the individual may be able to compensate or function
well when provided with appropriate accommodations or support services,
especially during the school years.
Moderate: Marked difficulties learning skills in one or more academic domains,
so that the individual is unlikely to become proficient without some intervals of
intensive 
and 
specialized 
teaching 
during 
the 
school 
years. 
Some
accommodations or supportive services at least part of the day at school, in the
workplace, or at home may be needed to complete activities accurately and
efficiently.
Severe: Severe difficulties learning skills, affecting several academic domains,
so that the individual is unlikely to learn those skills without ongoing intensive
individualized and specialized teaching for most of the school years. Even with
an array of appropriate accommodations or services at home, at school, or in the
workplace, the individual may not be able to complete all activities efficiently.
Recording Procedures
Each impaired academic domain and subskill of specific learning disorder should be recorded.
Because of ICD coding requirements, impairments in reading, impairments in written expression,
and impairments in mathematics, with their corresponding impairments in subskills, must be
coded and recorded separately. For example, impairments in reading and mathematics and
impairments in the subskills of reading rate or fluency, reading comprehension, accurate or
fluent calculation, and accurate math reasoning would be coded and recorded as F81.0 specific
learning disorder with impairment in reading, with impairment in reading rate or fluency, and
impairment in reading comprehension; F81.2 specific learning disorder with impairment in
mathematics, with impairment in accurate or fluent calculation and impairment in accurate math
reasoning.
Diagnostic Features
Specific learning disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a biological origin that is the
basis for abnormalities at a cognitive level that are associated with the behavioral signs of the
disorder. The biological origin includes an interaction of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental
factors, which affect the brain’s ability to perceive or process verbal or nonverbal information
efficiently and accurately.
One essential feature of specific learning disorder is persistent difficulties learning keystone
academic skills (Criterion A), with onset during the years of formal schooling (i.e., the
developmental period). Key academic skills include reading of single words accurately and
fluently, reading comprehension, written expression and spelling, arithmetic calculation, and
mathematical reasoning (solving mathematical problems). In contrast to talking or walking,
which are acquired developmental milestones that emerge with brain maturation, academic skills
(e.g., reading, spelling, writing, mathematics) have to be taught and learned explicitly. Specific
learning disorder disrupts the normal pattern of learning academic skills; it is not simply a
consequence of lack of opportunity of learning or inadequate instruction. Difficulties mastering
these key academic skills may also impede learning in other academic subjects (e.g., history,
science, social studies), but those problems are attributable to difficulties learning the underlying
academic skills.
79
Difficulties learning to map letters with the sounds of one’s language—to read printed words
(often called dyslexia [specific learning disorder with impairment in reading])—is one of the
most common manifestations of specific learning disorder. The learning difficulties manifest as a
range of observable, descriptive behaviors or symptoms (as listed in Criteria A1–A6). These
clinical symptoms may be observed, probed by means of the clinical interview, or ascertained
from school reports, rating scales, or descriptions in previous educational or psychological
assessments. The learning difficulties are persistent, not transitory. In children and adolescents,
persistence is defined as restricted progress in learning (i.e., no evidence that the individual is
catching up with classmates) for at least 6 months despite the provision of extra help at home or
school. For example, difficulties learning to read single words that do not fully or rapidly remit
with the provision of instruction in phonological skills or word identification strategies may
indicate a specific learning disorder. Evidence of persistent learning difficulties may be derived
from cumulative school reports, portfolios of the child’s evaluated work, curriculum-based
measures, or clinical interview. In adults, persistent difficulty refers to ongoing difficulties in
literacy or numeracy skills that manifest during childhood or adolescence, as indicated by
cumulative evidence from school reports, evaluated portfolios of work, or previous assessments.
A second key feature is that the individual’s performance of the affected academic skills is
well below expected for age (Criterion B). One robust clinical indicator of difficulties learning
academic skills is low academic achievement for age or average achievement that is sustainable
only by extraordinarily high levels of effort or support. In children, the low academic skills cause
significant interference in school performance (as indicated by school reports and teacher’s
grades or ratings). Another clinical indicator, particularly in adults, is avoidance of activities that
require the academic skills. Also in adulthood, low academic skills interfere with occupational
performance or everyday activities requiring those skills (as indicated by self-report or report by
others). However, this criterion also requires psychometric evidence from an individually
administered, psychometrically sound and culturally appropriate test of academic achievement
that is norm-referenced or criterion-referenced. Academic skills are distributed along a
continuum, so there is no natural cutpoint that can be used to differentiate individuals with and
without specific learning disorder. Thus, any threshold used to specify what constitutes
significantly low academic achievement (e.g., academic skills well below age expectation) is to a
large extent arbitrary. Low achievement scores on one or more standardized tests or subtests
within an academic domain (i.e., at least 1.5 standard deviations [SD] below the population mean
for age, which translates to a standard score of 78 or less, which is below the 7th percentile) are
needed for the greatest diagnostic certainty. However, precise scores will vary according to the
particular standardized tests that are used. On the basis of clinical judgment, a more lenient
threshold may be used (e.g., 1.0 SD below the population mean for age), when learning
difficulties are supported by converging evidence from clinical assessment, academic history,
school reports, or test scores. Moreover, since standardized tests are not available in all
languages, the diagnosis may then be based in part on clinical judgment of scores on available
test measures.
A third core feature is that the learning difficulties are readily apparent in the early school
years in most individuals (Criterion C). However, in others, the learning difficulties may not
manifest fully until later school years, by which time learning demands have increased and
exceed the individual’s limited capacities.
Another key diagnostic feature is that the learning difficulties are considered “specific” for
four reasons. First, they are not better explained by intellectual developmental disorders
(intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability]; global developmental delay);
hearing or vision disorders; or neurological or motor disorders (Criterion D). Specific learning
disorder affects learning in individuals who otherwise demonstrate normal levels of intellectual
functioning (generally estimated by an IQ score of greater than about 70 [± 5 points allowing for
measurement error]). The phrase “unexpected academic
80
underachievement” is often cited as the defining characteristic of specific learning disorder in
that the specific learning disabilities are not part of a more general learning difficulty as
manifested in intellectual developmental disorder or global developmental delay.
Second, the learning difficulty cannot be attributed to more general external factors, such as
economic or environmental disadvantage, chronic absenteeism, or lack of education as typically
provided in the individual’s community context. Third, the learning difficulty cannot be
attributed to neurological (e.g., pediatric stroke) or motor disorders or to vision or hearing
disorders, which are often associated with problems learning academic skills but are
distinguishable by presence of neurological signs. Finally, the learning difficulty may be
restricted to one academic skill or domain (e.g., reading single words, retrieving or calculating
number facts).
Specific learning disorder may also occur in individuals identified as intellectually “gifted.”
These individuals may be able to sustain apparently adequate academic functioning by using
compensatory strategies, extraordinarily high effort, or support, until the learning demands or
assessment procedures (e.g., timed tests) pose barriers to their demonstrating their learning or
accomplishing required tasks. In these cases, the individual’s achievement scores will be low
relative to ability level or achievement in other domains, rather than to the population mean for
achievement.
Comprehensive assessment is required. Specific learning disorder can only be diagnosed
after formal education starts but can be diagnosed at any point afterward in children, adolescents,
or adults, providing there is evidence of onset during the years of formal schooling (i.e., the
developmental period). No single data source is sufficient for a diagnosis of specific learning
disorder. Rather, specific learning disorder is a clinical diagnosis based on a synthesis of the
individual’s medical, developmental, educational, and family history; the history of the learning
difficulty, including its previous and current manifestation; the impact of the difficulty on
academic, occupational, or social functioning; previous or current school reports; portfolios of
work requiring academic skills; curriculum-based assessments; and previous or current scores
from individual standardized tests of academic achievement. If an intellectual, sensory,
neurological, or motor disorder is suspected, then the clinical assessment for specific learning
disorder should also include methods appropriate for these disorders. Thus, comprehensive
assessment will involve professionals with expertise in specific learning disorder and
psychological/cognitive assessment. Since specific learning disorder typically persists into
adulthood, reassessment is rarely necessary, unless indicated by marked changes in the learning
difficulties (amelioration or worsening) or requested for specific purposes.
Associated Features
The symptoms of specific learning disorder (difficulty with aspects of reading, writing, or
mathematics) frequently co-occur. An uneven profile of abilities is common, such as a
combination of above-average abilities in drawing, design, and other visuospatial abilities, and
slow, effortful, and inaccurate reading and poor reading comprehension and written expression.
Specific learning disorder is frequently but not invariably preceded, in preschool years, by delays
in attention, language, or motor skills that may persist and co-occur with specific learning
disorder.
Individuals with specific learning disorder typically (but not invariably) exhibit poor
performance on psychological tests of cognitive processing. However, it remains unclear
whether these cognitive abnormalities are the cause, correlate, or consequence of the learning
difficulties. Cognitive deficits associated with difficulties learning to read words are well
documented, and there is a burgeoning understanding of the cognitive deficits associated with
difficulty acquiring mathematics skills, but cognitive deficits associated with other
manifestations of specific learning disorder (e.g., reading comprehension, written expression) are
underspecified.
81
Although individual cognitive deficits particularly contribute to each specific learning
disorder symptom, some cognitive deficits are shared across different specific learning disorder
subtypes (e.g., processing speed) and may contribute to co-occurring symptoms of specific
learning disorder. The co-occurring nature of the symptoms of specific learning disorder and the
shared cognitive deficits across the specific learning disorder subtypes suggest shared underlying
biological mechanisms.
Thus, individuals with similar behavioral symptoms or test scores are found to have a variety
of cognitive deficits, and many of these processing deficits are also found in other
neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD], autistic
spectrum disorder, communication disorders, developmental coordination disorder).
As a group, individuals with the disorder show circumscribed alterations in cognitive
processing and brain structure and function. Genetic differences are also evident at the group
level. However, cognitive testing, neuroimaging, or genetic testing are not useful for diagnosis at
this time, and assessment of cognitive processing deficits is not required for diagnostic
assessment.
Prevalence
The prevalence of specific learning disorder across the academic domains of reading, writing,
and mathematics is 5%–15% among school-age children in Brazil, Northern Ireland, and the
United States. Prevalence in adults is unknown.
Development and Course
Onset, recognition, and diagnosis of specific learning disorder usually occur during the
elementary school years when children are required to learn to read, spell, write, and learn
mathematics. However, precursors such as language delays or deficits, difficulties in rhyming or
counting, or difficulties with fine motor skills required for writing commonly occur in early
childhood before the start of formal schooling.
Manifestations may be behavioral (e.g., a reluctance to engage in learning; oppositional
behavior). Specific learning disorder is lifelong, but the course and clinical expression are
variable, in part depending on the interactions among the task demands of the environment, the
range and severity of the individual’s learning difficulties, the individual’s learning abilities,
comorbidity, and the available support systems and intervention. Nonetheless, problems with
reading fluency and comprehension, spelling, written expression, and numeracy skills in
everyday life typically persist into adulthood.
Changes in manifestation of symptoms occur with age, so that an individual may have a
persistent or shifting array of learning difficulties across the lifespan. Adults with specific
learning disorder appear to experience limitations and restrictions in activity and participation in
domains of communication, interpersonal interactions and community, and social and civic life.
Examples of symptoms that may be observed among preschool-age children include a lack of
interest in playing games with language sounds (e.g., repetition, rhyming), and they may have
trouble learning nursery rhymes. Preschool children with specific learning disorder may
frequently use baby talk, mispronounce words, and have trouble remembering names of letters,
numbers, or days of the week. They may fail to recognize letters in their own names and have
trouble learning to count. Kindergarten-age children with specific learning disorder may be
unable to recognize and write letters, may be unable to write their own names, or may have
persistent use of invented spelling beyond developmentally typical time frames.
They may have trouble breaking down spoken words into syllables (e.g., “cowboy” into
“cow” and “boy”) and trouble recognizing words that rhyme (e.g., cat, bat, hat). Kindergarten-
age children also may have trouble connecting letters with their sounds (e.g., letter b makes the
sound /b/) and may be unable to recognize phonemes (e.g., do not know which in a set of words
[e.g., dog, man, car] starts with the same sound as “cat”).
Specific learning disorder in elementary school–age children typically manifests as marked
difficulty learning letter-sound correspondence (particularly in English-speaking children),
82
fluent word decoding, spelling, or math facts; reading aloud is slow, inaccurate, and effortful,
and some children struggle to understand the magnitude that a spoken or written number
represents. Children in primary grades (grades 1–3) may continue to have problems recognizing
and manipulating phonemes, be unable to read common one-syllable words (such as mat or top),
and be unable recognize common irregularly spelled words (e.g., said, two). They may commit
reading errors that indicate problems in connecting sounds and letters (e.g., “big” for “got”) and
have difficulty sequencing numbers and letters. Children in grades 1–3 also may have difficulty
remembering number facts or arithmetic procedures for adding, subtracting, and so forth, and
may complain that reading or arithmetic is hard and avoid doing it. Children with specific
learning disorder in the middle grades (grades 4–6) may mispronounce or skip parts of long,
multisyllable words (e.g., say “conible” for “convertible,” “aminal” for “animal”) and confuse
words that sound alike (e.g., “tornado” for “volcano”). They may have trouble remembering
dates, names, and telephone numbers and may have trouble completing homework or tests on
time. Children in the middle grades also may have poor comprehension with or without slow,
effortful, and inaccurate reading, and they may have trouble reading small function words (e.g.,
that, the, an, in). They may have very poor spelling and poor written work. They may get the first
part of a word correctly, then guess wildly (e.g., read “clover” as “clock”), and may express fear
of reading aloud or refuse to read aloud.
By contrast, adolescents may have mastered word decoding, but reading remains slow and
effortful, and they are likely to show marked problems in reading comprehension and written
expression (including poor spelling) and poor mastery of math facts or mathematical problem
solving. During adolescence and into adulthood, individuals with specific learning disorder may
continue to make numerous spelling mistakes and read single words and connected text slowly
and with much effort, with trouble pronouncing multisyllable words. They may frequently need
to reread material to understand or get the main point and have trouble making inferences from
written text. Adolescents and adults may avoid activities that demand reading or arithmetic
(reading for pleasure, reading instructions). Adults with specific learning disorder have ongoing
spelling problems, slow and effortful reading, or problems making important inferences from
numerical information in work-related written documents. They may avoid both leisure and
work-related activities that demand reading or writing or use alternative approaches to access
print (e.g., text-to-speech/speech-to-text software, audiobooks, audiovisual media).
An alternative clinical expression is that of circumscribed learning difficulties that persist
across the lifespan, such as an inability to master the basic sense of number (e.g., to know which
of a pair of numbers or dots represents the larger magnitude), or lack of proficiency in word
identification or spelling. Avoidance of or reluctance to engage in activities requiring academic
skills is common in children, adolescents, and adults. Individuals with poor reading and math
skills are more likely to report socioemotional distress (e.g., sadness, loneliness) as they advance
across elementary grade levels.
Episodes of severe anxiety or anxiety disorders, including somatic complaints or panic
attacks, are common across the lifespan and accompany both the circumscribed and the broader
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
expression of learning difficulties.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental 
factors, 
including 
socioeconomic 
conditions 
(e.g., 
low
socioeconomic status) and exposure to neurotoxicants, increase the risk for specific learning
disorder or difficulties in reading and mathematics. Risks for specific learning disorder or
difficulties in reading and mathematics include prenatal or early-life exposure to any of the
following: air pollution, nicotine, polybrominated diphenyl ethers or polychlorinated biphenyls
(flame retardants), lead, or manganese.
Specific learning disorder appears to aggregate in families, particularly
when affecting reading, mathematics, and spelling. The relative risk of specific
83
learning disorder in reading or mathematics is substantially higher (e.g., 4–8 times and 5–10
times higher, respectively) in first-degree relatives of individuals with these learning difficulties
compared with those without them. Notably, rates vary depending on method of ascertainment
(objective testing or self-report) of parent diagnostic status. Family history of reading difficulties
(dyslexia) and parental literacy skills predict literacy problems or specific learning disorder in
offspring, indicating the combined role of genetic and environmental factors.
There is high heritability for both reading ability and reading disability in alphabetic and
nonalphabetic languages, including high heritability for most manifestations of learning abilities
and disabilities (e.g., heritability estimate values greater than 0.6). Covariation between various
manifestations of learning difficulties is high, suggesting that genes related to one presentation
are highly correlated with genes related to another manifestation.
Preterm delivery or very low birthweight is a risk for specific learning disorder. In
individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1, risk of specific learning disorder is high, with up to
75% of individuals demonstrating a learning disorder.
Marked problems with inattentive, internalizing, and externalizing behaviors in
preschool years are predictive of later difficulties in reading and mathematics (but not necessarily
specific learning disorder) and nonresponse to effective academic interventions. Language
impairment in preschool years is strongly associated with later impairment in reading (e.g., word
reading, reading comprehension). For example, delay or disorders in speech or language, or
impaired cognitive processing (e.g., phonological awareness, working memory, rapid serial
naming), may predict later specific learning disorder in reading and in written expression.
Additionally, a diagnosis of ADHD in childhood is associated with underachievement in reading
and math in adulthood. Comorbidity with ADHD is predictive of worse mental health outcome
than that associated with specific learning disorder without ADHD. Systematic, intensive,
individualized instruction, using evidence-based interventions, may improve or ameliorate the
learning difficulties in some individuals or promote the use of compensatory strategies in others,
thereby mitigating the otherwise poor outcomes.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder occurs across linguistic and ethnoracial backgrounds and across
cultural and socioeconomic contexts but may vary in its manifestation according to the nature of
the spoken and written symbol systems and cultural and educational practices. For example, the
cognitive processing requirements of reading and of working with numbers vary greatly across
orthographies. In the English language, the observable hallmark clinical symptom of difficulties
learning to read is inaccurate and slow reading of single words; in other alphabetic languages
that have more direct mapping between sounds and letters (e.g., Spanish, German) and in
nonalphabetic languages (e.g., Chinese, Japanese), the hallmark feature is slow but accurate
reading. In English-language learners, assessment should include consideration of whether the
source of reading difficulties is a limited proficiency with English or a specific learning disorder.
Risk factors for specific learning disorder in English-language learners include a family history
of specific learning disorder or language delay in the native language, as well as learning
difficulties and deficits in phonological memory in English and failure to catch up with peers. If
there is suspicion of cultural or language differences (e.g., that an English-language learner is
influenced by limited English proficiency), the assessment needs to take into account the
individual’s language proficiency in his or her first or native language as well as in the second
language (in this example, English). Importantly, children who speak a language at home that
differs phonologically from the language of academic instruction are not more likely to have
phonological deficits than their peers who speak the same language at home and at school.
Comorbid reading difficulties may vary with different languages; for example, reading
difficulties are less frequent among Chinese-reading children with developmental coordination
disorder in Taiwan compared
84
with children in English-speaking countries, possibly because of the characteristics of the two
written languages (logographic vs. alphabetic). Considerations in assessment may include the
linguistic and cultural context in which the individual is living, as well as his or her educational
and learning history in the original linguistic and cultural context. Risk factors for learning
problems among refugee and migrant children include teacher stereotyping and low expectations,
bullying, ethnic and racialized discrimination, parental misunderstandings about educational
styles and expectations, trauma, and postmigration stressors.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder is more common in males than in females (ratios range from about 2:1
to 3:1) and cannot be attributed to factors such as ascertainment bias, definitional or
measurement variation, language, ethnoracial background, or socioeconomic status. Sex
differences in dyslexia (specific learning disorder with impairment in reading) may be partially
mediated by processing speed.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In U.S. adolescents age 15 years in public school, poor reading ability was associated with
suicidal thoughts and behavior compared with adolescents with typical reading scores, even
when controlling for sociodemographic and psychiatric variables. In a population-based study of
adults in Canada, prevalence of lifetime suicide attempts among those with specific learning
disorder was higher than that among those without a specific learning disorder, even after
Normal variations in academic attainment.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders.
Neurocognitive disorders.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
adjustment for childhood adversities, history of mental illness and substance use, and
sociodemographic factors. Among those with specific learning disorder, a history of witnessing
chronic parental domestic violence and ever having had a major depressive disorder were
associated with increased risk for suicidal behavior.
Functional Consequences of Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder can have negative functional consequences across the lifespan,
including lower academic attainment, higher rates of high school dropout, lower rates of
postsecondary education, high levels of psychological distress and poorer overall mental health,
higher rates of unemployment and underemployment, and lower incomes. School dropout and
co-occurring depressive symptoms increase the risk for poor mental health outcomes, including
suicidal thoughts or behavior, whereas high levels of social or emotional support predict better
mental health outcomes.
Differential Diagnosis
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from normal
variations in academic attainment attributable to external factors (e.g., lack of educational
opportunity, consistently poor instruction, learning in a second language), because the learning
difficulties persist in the presence of adequate educational opportunity and exposure to the same
instruction as the peer group, and competency in the language of instruction, even when it is
different from one’s primary spoken language.
Specific learning disorder differs from
general learning difficulties associated with intellectual developmental disorder, because the
learning difficulties occur in the presence of normal levels of intellectual functioning (i.e., IQ
score of at least 70 ± 5). If intellectual developmental disorder is present, specific learning
disorder can be diagnosed only when the learning difficulties are in excess of those usually
associated with the intellectual developmental disorder.
Specific 
learning 
disorder 
is
distinguished from learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders
85
(e.g., pediatric stroke, traumatic brain injury, hearing impairment, vision impairment), because in
these cases there are abnormal findings on neurological examination.
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from learning problems
associated with neurodegenerative cognitive disorders. In specific learning disorder, the clinical
expression of specific learning difficulties occurs during the developmental period, which
sometimes only becomes evident when learning demands have increased and exceed the
individual’s limited capacities (as may occur in adulthood), and the difficulties do not manifest
as a marked decline from a former state.
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the poor
academic performance associated with ADHD, because in the latter condition the problems may
not necessarily reflect specific difficulties in learning academic skills but rather may reflect
difficulties in performing those skills. However, the co-occurrence of specific learning disorder
Psychotic disorders.
F82
and ADHD is more frequent than expected by chance. If criteria for both disorders are met, both
diagnoses can be given.
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the cognitive-processing
difficulties associated with schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, because with these
disorders there is a decline (often rapid) in these functional domains. However, deficits in
reading ability are more severe in specific learning disorder than what would be predicted by the
general cognitive impairments associated with schizophrenia. If criteria for both disorders are
met, both diagnoses can be given.
Comorbidity
The different types of specific learning disorder commonly co-occur with one another (e.g.,
specific learning disorder with impairment in mathematics and with impairment in reading) and
with other neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., ADHD, communication disorders, developmental
coordination disorder, autism spectrum disorder) or other mental disorders (e.g., anxiety and
depressive disorders) or behavioral problems. Notably, estimates of the comorbidity of math and
reading difficulties vary depending on the tests used to define the math difficulty, likely because
the same symptom (e.g., arithmetic problems) can be associated with different cognitive deficits
(e.g., a deficit in language skills or a deficit in number processing). These comorbidities do not
necessarily exclude the diagnosis of specific learning disorder but may make testing and
differential diagnosis more difficult, because each of the co-occurring disorders independently
interferes with the execution of activities of daily living, including learning. Thus, clinical
judgment is required to attribute such impairment to learning difficulties. If there is an indication
that another diagnosis could account for the difficulties learning keystone academic skills
described in Criterion A, specific learning disorder should not be diagnosed.