Differential Diagnosis
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and
 sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is differentiated from sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or
 anxiolytic-induced mental disorders (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive
 disorder) in that sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder describes a problematic pattern
 626
 of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use that involves impaired control over such use; social
 impairment attributable to this use; risky sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use (e.g., driving while
 intoxicated); and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal);
 whereas sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
Other medical conditions.
 Alcohol use disorder.
 Clinically appropriate use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications.
 withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication;
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced
 mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or a sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental
 disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, and anxiolytic use
 disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 The slurred speech, incoordination, and other associated features
 characteristic of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication could be the result of another
 medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis) or of a prior head trauma (e.g., a subdural hematoma).
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder must be differentiated from
 alcohol use disorder. The differential diagnosis is determined mostly through clinical history,
 although liver damage and other potential signs of chronic alcohol toxicity (e.g.,
 cardiomyopathy) can also be more suggestive of alcohol use disorder than of sedative, hypnotic,
 or anxiolytic use disorder.
 Individuals may continue to
 take benzodiazepine medication according to a physician’s direction for a legitimate medical
 indication over extended periods of time. Even if physiological signs of tolerance or withdrawal
 are manifested, many of these individuals do not develop symptoms that meet the criteria for
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder because they are not preoccupied with obtaining
 the substance and its use does not interfere with their performance of usual social or occupational
 roles.