Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 The symptoms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal may be
 mimicked by other medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis). If seizures are
 a feature of the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, the
 631
differential diagnosis includes the various causes of seizures (e.g., infections, head injury,
 poisonings).
 Essential tremor.
 Essential tremor, a neurological condition that frequently runs in families, may
 erroneously suggest the tremulousness associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 withdrawal.
 Alcohol withdrawal.
 Alcohol withdrawal produces a syndrome very similar to that of sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal. The differential diagnosis is determined mostly through
 clinical history, although liver damage and other potential signs of chronic alcohol toxicity (e.g.,
 cardiomyopathy) can also be more suggestive of alcohol withdrawal than of sedative, hypnotic,
 or anxiolytic withdrawal.
 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
 Sedative, 
hypnotic, 
or 
anxiolytic
 withdrawal is distinguished from sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders
 (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal)
 because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in the latter disorders are in excess of those usually
 associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; predominate in the clinical
 presentation; and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Anxiety disorders.
 Recurrence or worsening of an underlying anxiety disorder produces a
 syndrome similar to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, although the most extreme
 manifestations of withdrawal, such as delirium tremens or true seizures, are not symptoms of any
 anxiety disorder. Withdrawal would be suspected with an abrupt reduction in the dosage of a
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medication. When a taper is under way, distinguishing the
 withdrawal syndrome from the underlying anxiety disorder can be difficult. As with alcohol,
 lingering withdrawal symptoms (e.g., anxiety, moodiness, trouble sleeping) can be mistaken for
 independent anxiety or depressive disorders (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder).