Differential Diagnosis
 In addition to the general consideration of differential diagnosis for all cases, it is especially
 important to consider other possible causes of either significantly low body weight or significant
 weight loss when the presenting features are atypical (e.g., onset after age 40 years).
 Medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, hyperthyroidism, occult malignancies, and
 acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]).
 Serious weight loss may occur in medical conditions, but individuals with these disorders usually
 do not also manifest a disturbance in the way their body weight or shape is experienced or an
 intense fear of weight gain or persist in behaviors that interfere with appropriate weight gain.
Acute weight loss associated with a medical condition can occasionally be followed by the onset
 or recurrence of anorexia nervosa, which can initially be masked by the comorbid medical
 condition. Rarely, anorexia nervosa develops after bariatric surgery.
 Major depressive disorder.
 In major depressive disorder, severe weight loss may occur, but most
 individuals with major depressive disorder do not have either a desire for excessive weight loss
 or an intense fear of gaining weight.
 Schizophrenia.
 Individuals with schizophrenia may exhibit odd eating behavior and occasionally
 experience significant weight loss, but they rarely show the fear of gaining weight and the body
 image disturbance required for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.
 Substance use disorders.
 Individuals with substance use disorders may experience low weight
 because of poor nutritional intake but generally do not fear gaining weight and do not manifest
 body image disturbance. Individuals who abuse substances that reduce appetite (e.g., cocaine,
 stimulants) and who also endorse fear of weight gain should be carefully evaluated for the
 possibility of comorbid anorexia nervosa, given that the substance use may represent a persistent
 behavior that interferes with weight gain (Criterion B).
 387
 Social anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and body dysmorphic disorder.
 Some of the
 features of anorexia nervosa overlap with the criteria for social anxiety disorder, OCD, and body
 dysmorphic disorder. Specifically, individuals may feel humiliated or embarrassed to be seen
 eating in public, as in social anxiety disorder; may exhibit obsessions and compulsions related to
 food, as in OCD; or may be preoccupied with an imagined defect in bodily appearance, as in
 body dysmorphic disorder. If the individual with anorexia nervosa has social fears that are
 limited to eating behavior alone, the diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should not be made, but
 social fears unrelated to eating behavior (e.g., excessive fear of speaking in public) may warrant
 an additional diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Similarly, an additional diagnosis of OCD
 should be considered only if the individual exhibits obsessions and compulsions unrelated to
 food (e.g., an excessive fear of contamination), and an additional diagnosis of body dysmorphic
 disorder should be considered only if the distortion is unrelated to body shape and size (e.g.,
 preoccupation that one’s nose is too big).
 Bulimia nervosa.
 Individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit recurrent episodes of binge eating,
 engage in inappropriate behavior to avoid weight gain (e.g., self-induced vomiting), and are
 overly concerned with body shape and weight. However, unlike individuals with anorexia
 nervosa, binge-eating/purging type, individuals with bulimia nervosa maintain body weight at or
 above a minimally normal level.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
 Individuals with this disorder may exhibit significant
 weight loss or significant nutritional deficiency, but they do not have a fear of gaining weight or
 of becoming fat, nor do they have a disturbance in the way they experience their body shape and
 weight.
 