Differential Diagnosis
 Restriction of food intake is a nonspecific symptom that can accompany a number of mental
 disorders and medical conditions and that can also be developmentally appropriate.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be diagnosed concurrently with the disorders below
 if all criteria are met, and the eating disturbance requires specific clinical attention.
 379
 Other medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, food allergies and intolerances, occult
 malignancies).
 Restriction of food intake may occur in other medical conditions, especially those with ongoing
 symptoms such as vomiting, loss of appetite, nausea, abdominal pain, or diarrhea. A diagnosis of
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires that the disturbance of intake is beyond that
 directly accounted for by physical symptoms consistent with a medical condition; the eating
 disturbance may also persist after being triggered by a medical condition and following
 resolution of the medical condition.
 Underlying medical or comorbid mental conditions may complicate feeding and eating.
 Because older individuals, postsurgical patients, and individuals receiving chemotherapy often
 lose their appetite, an additional diagnosis of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires
 that the eating disturbance is a primary focus for intervention.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric
syndrome.
 Acute-onset symptoms, late age at onset, or atypical symptoms suggest the need for a thorough
 assessment to rule out the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
 pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS). PANS is characterized by abrupt,
 dramatic onset of obsessive-compulsive symptoms or severely restricted food intake, together
 with a range of additional neuropsychiatric symptoms.
 Specific neurological/neuromuscular, structural, or congenital disorders and conditions
 associated with feeding difficulties.
 Feeding difficulties are common in a number of congenital and neurological conditions often
 related to problems with oral/esophageal/pharyngeal structure and function, such as hypotonia of
 musculature, tongue protrusion, and unsafe swallowing. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
 can be diagnosed in individuals with such presentations as long as all diagnostic criteria are met.
 Reactive attachment disorder.
 Some degree of withdrawal from caregivers is characteristic of
 reactive attachment disorder and can lead to a disturbance in the caregiver-child relationship that
 can affect feeding and the child’s intake. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be
 diagnosed concurrently only if all criteria are met for both disorders and the feeding disturbance
 is a primary focus for intervention.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 Individuals with autism spectrum disorder often present with rigid
 eating behaviors and heightened sensory sensitivities. However, these features do not always
 result in the level of impairment that would be required for a diagnosis of avoidant/restrictive
 food intake disorder. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be diagnosed concurrently
 only if all criteria are met for both disorders and when the eating disturbance requires specific
 treatment.
 Specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, and other anxiety disorders.
 Specific phobia, other type,
 includes as an example “situations that may lead to choking or vomiting” and can represent the
 primary trigger for the fear, anxiety, or avoidance required for diagnosis. Distinguishing specific
 phobia from avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be difficult when a fear of choking or
 vomiting has resulted in food avoidance. Although avoidance or restriction of food intake
 secondary to a pronounced fear of choking or vomiting can be conceptualized as specific phobia,
 in situations when the eating problem becomes the primary focus of clinical attention,
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder becomes the appropriate diagnosis. In social anxiety
 disorder, the individual may present with a fear of being observed by others while eating, which
 can also occur in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
 Anorexia nervosa.
 Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements leading to significantly
 low body weight is a core feature of anorexia nervosa. However, individuals with anorexia
 nervosa also display a fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that
 interferes with weight gain, as well as specific disturbances in
 380
 relation to perception and experience of their own body weight and shape. These features are not
 present in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, and the two disorders should not be
 diagnosed concurrently. Differential diagnosis between avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
 and anorexia nervosa may be difficult, especially in late childhood and early adolescence,
 because these disorders may share a number of common symptoms (e.g., food avoidance, low
weight). Differential diagnosis is also potentially difficult in individuals with anorexia nervosa
 who deny any fear of fatness but nonetheless engage in persistent behaviors that prevent weight
 gain and who do not recognize the medical seriousness of their low weight—a presentation
 sometimes termed “non–fat phobic anorexia nervosa.” Full consideration of symptoms, course,
 and family history is advised, and diagnosis may be best made in the context of a clinical
 relationship over time. In some individuals, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder might
 precede the onset of anorexia nervosa.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder may present with
 avoidance or restriction of intake in relation to preoccupations with food or ritualized eating
 behavior. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be diagnosed concurrently only if all
 criteria are met for both disorders and when the aberrant eating is a major aspect of the clinical
 presentation requiring specific intervention.
 Major depressive disorder.
 In major depressive disorder, appetite might be affected to such an
 extent that individuals present with significantly restricted food intake, usually in relation to
 overall energy intake and often associated with weight loss. Usually appetite loss and related
 reduction of intake abate with resolution of mood problems. Avoidant/restrictive food intake
 disorder should only be used concurrently if full criteria are met for both disorders and when the
 eating disturbance requires specific treatment.
 Schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
 Individuals with schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other
 psychotic disorders may exhibit odd eating behaviors, avoidance of specific foods because of
 delusional beliefs, or other manifestations of avoidant or restrictive intake. In some cases,
 delusional beliefs may contribute to a concern about negative consequences of ingesting certain
 foods. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be used concurrently only if all criteria
 are met for both disorders and when the eating disturbance requires specific treatment.
 Factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on another.
 Avoidant/restrictive 
food 
intake
 disorder should be differentiated from factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on
 another. In order to assume the sick role, some individuals with factitious disorder may
 intentionally describe diets that are much more restrictive than those they are actually able to
 consume, as well as complications of such behavior, such as a need for enteral feedings or
 nutritional supplements, an inability to tolerate a normal range of foods, and/or an inability to
 participate normally in age-appropriate situations involving food. The presentation may be
 impressively dramatic and engaging, and the symptoms reported inconsistently. In factitious
 disorder imposed on another, the caregiver describes symptoms consistent with
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and may induce physical symptoms such as failure to
 gain weight. As with any diagnosis of factitious disorder imposed on another, the caregiver
 receives the diagnosis rather than the affected individual, and diagnosis should be made only on
 the basis of a careful, comprehensive assessment of the affected individual, the caregiver, and
 their interaction.
 Developmentally normal behavior.
 During normal development, some toddlers and children
 transiently narrow the variety of foods they are willing to eat. This phenomenon, sometimes
 referred to as “picky eating,” usually resolves spontaneously without intervention.
 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder does not include such developmentally normal
 behaviors unless they become sufficiently severe to lead to failure to meet appropriate nutritional
needs or produce significant impairment in functioning (Criterion A).
 381
 