Differential Diagnosis
 Bulimia nervosa.
 Binge-eating disorder has recurrent binge eating in common with bulimia
 nervosa but differs from the latter disorder in some fundamental respects. In terms of clinical
 presentation, the recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior (e.g., purging, driven exercise)
 seen in bulimia nervosa is absent in binge-eating disorder. Unlike individuals with bulimia
 nervosa, individuals with binge-eating disorder typically do not show marked or sustained
 dietary restriction designed to influence body weight and shape between binge-eating episodes.
 They may, however, report frequent attempts at dieting. Binge-eating disorder also differs from
 bulimia nervosa in terms of response to treatment. Rates of improvement are consistently higher
Obesity.
 Bipolar and depressive disorders.
 Borderline personality disorder.
 among individuals with binge-eating disorder than among those with bulimia nervosa.
 Binge-eating disorder is associated with overweight and obesity but has several key
 features that are distinct from obesity. First, levels of overvaluation of body weight and shape are
 higher in obese individuals with the disorder than in those without the disorder. Second, rates of
 psychiatric comorbidity are significantly higher among obese individuals with the disorder
 compared with those without the disorder. Third, the outcome of evidence-based psychological
 treatments for binge-eating disorder is more often successful than the treatment of obesity in
 individuals with comorbid obesity and binge-eating disorder.
 Increases in appetite and weight gain are included in the criteria
 for major depressive episode and in the atypical features specifiers for
 396
 depressive and bipolar disorders. Increased eating in the context of a major depressive episode
 may or may not be associated with loss of control. If the full criteria for both disorders are met,
 both diagnoses can be given. Binge eating and other symptoms of disordered eating are seen in
 association with bipolar disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses
 should be given.
 Binge eating is included in the impulsive behavior criterion that is
 part of the definition of borderline personality disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are
 met, both diagnoses should be given.