Differential Diagnosis
 726
 Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies (NCDLB).
 The distinction between NCDLB
 and NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is based on the timing and sequence of motor symptoms
 and cognitive symptoms. Consensus criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies separate NCDLB
 from NCD due to Parkinson’s disease by specifying that for dementia to be attributed to
 Parkinson’s disease, the Parkinson’s disease diagnosis must be present for at least 1 year before
 cognitive decline has reached the level of major NCD, whereas for NCDLB, the cognitive
symptoms may begin before, with, or in the absence of parkinsonism. By contrast, expert
 consensus criteria for Parkinson’s disease propose that if cognitive decline occurs prior to a
 motor diagnosis, the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease may still be made; therefore, a clinician
 may attribute the cognitive decline to the Parkinson’s disease and diagnose NCD due to
 Parkinson’s disease. Consequently, the clinician may choose to diagnose NCD due to
 Parkinson’s disease or NCDLB for individuals with major NCD that starts either before or within
 12 months of Parkinson’s disease. In such circumstances, the clinician decides which diagnosis
 is more appropriate. If Parkinson’s disease has been diagnosed for at least 1 year prior to the
 onset of cognitive symptoms, then both expert criteria agree that NCD due to Parkinson’s disease
 would typically be the appropriate diagnosis. The timing and sequence of parkinsonism and mild
 NCD may be particularly difficult to determine, and unspecified NCD may need to be diagnosed
 until the order of clinical progression becomes evident.
 Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease.
 The motor features are the key to
 distinguishing major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease from major or mild NCD due to
 Alzheimer’s disease. However, the two disorders can co-occur, and individuals with well
established Alzheimer’s disease can develop mild parkinsonism.
 Major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder.
 Major or mild vascular NCD may manifest with
 parkinsonian features that may occur as a consequence of diffuse cortical or subcortical small
 vessel disease. However, the parkinsonian features typically are not sufficient for a diagnosis of
 Parkinson’s disease, and the course of the NCD usually has a clear association with
 cerebrovascular changes.
 Neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., neurodegenerative disorders).
 When 
a
 diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is being considered, the distinction
 must also be made from other brain disorders, such as progressive supranuclear palsy,
 corticobasal degeneration, multiple system atrophy, tumors, and hydrocephalus.
 Antipsychotic (or other dopamine receptor–blocking drug)–induced parkinsonism.
 Antipsychotic 
(or
 other dopamine receptor–blocking drug)–induced parkinsonism can occur in individuals with
 other NCDs, particularly when antipsychotic medications are prescribed for the behavioral
 manifestations of such disorders.
 