Differential Diagnosis
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Major and mild NCDs due to other neurodegenerative processes
 (e.g., Lewy body disease, frontotemporal degeneration) share the insidious onset and gradual
 decline caused by Alzheimer’s disease but have distinctive core features of their own (which are
not always present). For example, NCD with Lewy bodies is typically characterized by frequent
 fluctuations in cognition early in the disease, parkinsonian features, gait imbalances, and visual
 hallucinations. Individuals with frontotemporal NCD may present with a distinct behavioral or
 language variant. The behavioral variant typically
 695
 first manifests with prominent changes in social behavior, such as disinhibition, apathy, or
 perseverative behavior, that may not infrequently lead to a primary psychiatric diagnosis. In
 contrast, the language variant of frontotemporal NCD may manifest with impairments in
 expressive language or word comprehension.
 In major or mild vascular NCD, there is typically a history of stroke temporally related to the
 onset of cognitive impairment, and infarcts or hemosiderin deposits observed on brain imaging
 can be judged sufficient to account for the clinical picture. However, major or mild vascular
 NCD shares many clinical features with Alzheimer’s disease; frequently Alzheimer’s pathology
 is present alone or in combination with vascular pathologies. It should be noted that white matter
 change alone does not constitute enough evidence of cerebrovascular disease to propose a mixed
 etiology if the other diagnostic considerations support the diagnosis of NCD due to Alzheimer’s
 disease. The presence of subcortical ischemic changes on neuroimaging must be interpreted
 carefully in view of whether concurrent Alzheimer’s pathology is present.
 Other concurrent, active neurological or systemic illness.
 Other neurological or systemic illness
 should be considered if there is an appropriate temporal relationship and severity to account for
 the clinical picture. At the mild NCD level, it may be difficult to distinguish an Alzheimer’s
 disease etiology from that of another medical condition (e.g., thyroid disorders, vitamin B12
 deficiency).
 Major depressive disorder.
 Particularly at the mild NCD level, the differential diagnosis also
 includes major depression. The presence of depression may be associated with reduced daily
 functioning and poor concentration that may resemble an NCD, but improvement with treatment
 of depression may be useful in making the distinction. If the symptoms meeting criteria for a
 major depressive episode are judged to be due to the physiological effects of Alzheimer’s
 disease, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with major depressive
like episode, should be given instead of major depressive disorder.
 