Differential Diagnosis
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Other neurodegenerative diseases may be distinguished from
 major or mild frontotemporal NCD by their characteristic features. In major or mild NCD due to
 Alzheimer’s disease, decline in learning and memory is an early feature. However, 10%–30% of
 individuals presenting with a syndrome suggestive of major or mild frontotemporal NCD are
 found at autopsy to have Alzheimer’s disease pathology. This occurs more frequently in
 individuals who present with progressive dysexecutive syndromes in the absence of behavioral
 changes or movement disorder or in those with the logopenic variant.
 In major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies, core and suggestive features of Lewy bodies must
 be present. In major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, spontaneous parkinsonism
 emerges well before the cognitive decline. In major or mild vascular NCD, depending on
 affected brain regions, there may also be loss of executive function and behavioral changes such
 as apathy, and this disorder should be considered in the differential diagnosis. However, history
 of a cerebrovascular event is temporally related to the onset of cognitive impairment in major or
 mild vascular NCD, and neuroimaging reveals infarctions or white matter lesions sufficient to
 account for the clinical picture.
 699
 Other neurological conditions.
 Major or mild frontotemporal NCD overlaps with progressive
 supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and motor neuron disease clinically as well as
Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 pathologically. Progressive supranuclear palsy is characterized by supranuclear gaze palsies and
 axial-predominant parkinsonism. Pseudobulbar signs may be present, and retropulsion (losing
 balance in a backward direction) is often prominent. Neurocognitive assessment shows
 psychomotor slowing, poor working memory, and executive dysfunction. Corticobasal
 degeneration presents with asymmetric rigidity, limb apraxia, postural instability, myoclonus,
 alien limb phenomenon, and cortical sensory loss. Many individuals with behavioral-variant
 major or mild frontotemporal NCD show features of motor neuron disease, which tend to be
 mixed upper and predominantly lower motor neuron disease.
 Behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal
 NCD may be mistaken for a primary mental disorder, such as major depression, bipolar
 disorders, or schizophrenia, and individuals with this variant often present initially to psychiatry.
 Over time, the development of progressive neurocognitive difficulties will help to make the
 distinction. A careful medical evaluation will help to exclude treatable causes of NCDs, such as
 metabolic disturbances, nutritional deficiencies, and infections. If the symptoms characteristic of
 a primary mental disorder (e.g., delusions) are judged to be due to the physiological effects of
 frontotemporal degeneration, a diagnosis of the appropriate mental disorder due to
 frontotemporal degeneration should be given instead of the primary psychotic disorder (e.g.,
 psychotic disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration, with delusions).