Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Multiple
Etiologies
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the neurocognitive disorder is the pathophysiological consequence of more
than one etiological process, excluding substances (e.g., neurocognitive disorder
due to Alzheimer’s disease with subsequent development of vascular
neurocognitive disorder).
Note: Refer to the diagnostic criteria for the various neurocognitive disorders
due to specific medical conditions for guidance on establishing the particular
etiologies.
C. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder and do
not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, code first all of the
etiological medical conditions (with the exception of vascular disease, which is not
coded), followed by either F02.81 for major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple
etiologies, with behavioral disturbance; or F02.80 for major neurocognitive disorder
due to multiple etiologies, without behavioral disturbance.
If vascular disease is among the multiple etiological medical conditions, code next
either F01.51 for major vascular neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral
disturbance; or F01.50 for major vascular neurocognitive disorder, without behavioral
disturbance. Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be
coded for major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For example, for a presentation of major neurocognitive disorder, moderate, with a
behavioral disturbance, that is judged to be due to Alzheimer’s disease, vascular
disease, and HIV infection, and in which heavy chronic alcohol use is judged to be a
contributing factor, code the following: G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease, B20 HIV
infection; F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease and HIV
infection, 
moderate, 
with 
behavioral 
disturbance; 
F01.51 
major 
vascular
neurocognitive disorder, moderate, with behavioral disturbance; and F10.27 severe
alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder, moderate,
nonamnestic-confabulatory type.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, code G31.84. (Note: Do
not use the additional codes for the etiologies. “With behavioral disturbance” and
“without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies: Use additional
code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to the various
etiologies (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with delusions;
F06.31 depressive disorder due to cerebrovascular disease, with depressive
features).
This category is included to cover the clinical presentation of a neurocognitive disorder (NCD)
for which there is evidence that multiple medical conditions have played a probable role in the
development of the NCD. In addition to evidence indicative of the presence of multiple medical
conditions that are known to cause NCD (i.e., findings from the history and physical
examination, and laboratory findings), it may be helpful to refer to the diagnostic criteria and text
for the various medical etiologies (e.g., NCD due to Parkinson’s disease) for more information
on establishing the etiological connection for that particular medical condition.
732
Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder
R41.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
neurocognitive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the neurocognitive disorders
diagnostic class. The unspecified neurocognitive disorder category is used in
situations in which the precise etiology cannot be determined with sufficient certainty
to make an etiological attribution.
Coding note: For unspecified major or mild neurocognitive disorder, code R41.9.
(Note: Do not use additional codes for any presumed etiological medical conditions.
“With behavioral disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded
but should still be recorded.)