Differential Diagnosis
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Since incidental brain infarctions and white matter lesions are
 common in older individuals, it is important to consider other possible etiologies when an NCD
 is present in an individual with white matter lesions. A history of memory deficit early in the
 course, and progressive worsening of memory, language, executive function, and perceptual
motor abilities in the absence of corresponding focal lesions on brain imaging, are suggestive of
 Alzheimer’s disease as the primary diagnosis. Potential biomarkers currently being validated for
 Alzheimer’s disease, such as cerebrospinal fluid levels of β-amyloid and phosphorylated tau, and
 amyloid and tau imaging, may prove to be helpful in the differential diagnosis. NCD with Lewy
 bodies is distinguished from major or mild vascular NCD by its core features of fluctuating
 cognition, visual hallucinations, and spontaneous parkinsonism. While deficits in executive
 function and language occur in major or mild vascular NCD, the insidious onset and gradual
 progression of behavioral features or language impairment are characteristic of frontotemporal
 NCD and are not typical of vascular etiology.
 Other medical conditions.
 A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is not made if other
 diseases (e.g., brain tumor, multiple sclerosis, encephalitis, toxic or metabolic disorders) are
 present and are of sufficient severity to account for the cognitive impairment.
 Other mental disorders.
 A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is inappropriate if the
 symptoms can be entirely attributed to delirium, although delirium may sometimes be
 superimposed on a preexisting major or mild vascular NCD, in which case both diagnoses can be
 made. If the criteria for major depressive disorder are met and the cognitive impairment is
temporally related to the likely onset of the depression, major or mild vascular NCD should not
 be diagnosed. However, if the NCD preceded the development of the depression, or the severity
 of the cognitive impairment is out of proportion to the severity of the depression, depressive
 disorder due to cerebrovascular disease should be diagnosed instead of major depressive
 disorder.
 