Tic Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
Note: A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or
vocalization.
Tourette’s Disorder
A. Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at
some time during the illness, although not necessarily concurrently.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year
since first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
encephalitis).
Persistent (Chronic) Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
A. Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during the
illness, but not both motor and vocal.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year
since first tic onset.
F95.0
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder.
Specify if:
With motor tics only
With vocal tics only
Provisional Tic Disorder
A. Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics.
B. The tics have been present for less than 1 year since first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor
or vocal tic disorder.
Specifiers
The “motor tics only” or “vocal tics only” specifier is only required for persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Tic disorders comprise five diagnostic categories: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic) motor
or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, and the other specified and unspecified tic
disorders. Diagnosis for any of the specific tic disorders is based on the presence of motor and/or
vocal tics (Criterion A), duration of tics (Criterion B), age at onset (Criterion C), and absence of
any known cause such as another medical condition or substance use (Criterion D). The tic
disorder diagnoses are hierarchical in order (i.e., Tourette’s disorder, followed by persistent
[chronic] motor or vocal tic disorder, followed by provisional tic
94
disorder, followed by the other specified and unspecified tic disorders). Once a tic disorder at
one level of the hierarchy is diagnosed, a lower hierarchy diagnosis cannot be made (Criterion
E).
Tics are typically sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movements or vocalizations.
Some motor tics can be slower twisting or tightening movements that occur over varying lengths
of time. An individual may exhibit various tics over time, but, at any point in time, the tic
repertoire may recur in a characteristic fashion. Although tics can include almost any muscle
group or vocalization, certain tics, such as eye blinking or throat clearing, are common across
patient populations. There is often a localized uncomfortable sensation (premonitory sensation)
prior to a tic, and most individuals report an “urge” to tic. Consequently, tics are generally
experienced as involuntary, but some tics can be voluntarily suppressed for varying lengths of
time.
Explicit discussion of tics can serve as a trigger. Likewise, observing a gesture or sound in
another person may result in an individual with a tic disorder making a similar gesture or sound,
which may be incorrectly perceived by others as purposeful. This can be particularly problematic
when the individual is interacting with authority figures who do not have an adequate
understanding of tic disorders (e.g., teachers, supervisors, police).
Tics are classically categorized as either simple or complex. Simple motor tics are
characterized by the limited involvement of specific muscle groups, often are of short duration,
and can include eye blinks, facial grimaces, shoulder shrugs, or extension of the extremities.
Simple vocal tics include throat clearing, sniffs, chirps, barks, or grunting often caused by
contraction of the diaphragm or muscles of the oropharynx. Complex motor tics are of longer
duration and often include a combination of simple tics such as simultaneous head turning and
shoulder shrugging. Complex tics can appear purposeful, such as head gestures or torso
movements. They can also include imitations of someone else’s movements (echopraxia) or
sexual or taboo gestures (copropraxia). Similarly, complex vocal tics have linguistic meaning
(words or partial words) and can include repeating one’s own sounds or words (palilalia),
repeating the last-heard word or phrase (echolalia), or uttering socially unacceptable words,
including obscenities, or ethnic, racial, or religious slurs (coprolalia). Importantly, coprolalia is
an abrupt, sharp bark or grunt utterance and lacks the prosody of similar inappropriate speech
observed in human interactions.
The presence of motor and/or vocal tics varies across the five tic disorders (Criterion A). For
Tourette’s disorder, both motor and vocal tics must be present (though not necessarily
concurrently), whereas for persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, only motor or only
vocal tics are present. For provisional tic disorder, motor and/or vocal tics may be present. For
other specified or unspecified tic disorders, the tics or tic-like symptoms are best characterized as
tics but are atypical in presentation or age at onset, or have a known etiology.
The 1-year minimum duration criterion (Criterion B) assures that individuals diagnosed with
either Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder have had persistent
symptoms. Tics wax and wane in severity, and some individuals may have tic-free intervals of
weeks to months; however, an individual who has had tics of greater than 1 year’s duration since
first tic onset would be considered to have persistent symptoms regardless of intermittent tic-free
periods. For an individual with motor and/or vocal tics for less than 1 year since first tic onset, a
provisional tic disorder diagnosis can be considered. The onset of tics must occur prior to age 18
years (Criterion C). Tic disorders typically begin in the prepubertal period, with an average age
at onset between 4 and 6 years, and with the incidence of first-onset tic disorders decreasing in
the later teen years. First onset of tics in adulthood is exceedingly rare and is often associated
with exposures to illicit substances (e.g., excessive cocaine use), is the result of a central nervous
system insult, or is related to a functional neurological disorder. Although first onset of tics is
uncommon in teenagers and adults, it is not uncommon for adolescents and adults to present for
an initial diagnostic assessment and, when carefully evaluated, provide a history of milder tics
dating
95
back to childhood, even if earlier phases of development included tic-free periods of months
or years. First-onset abnormal movements suggestive of tics that occur outside of the usual age
range should result in evaluation for other movement disorders, including functional tic-like
complex movements or vocalizations.
Tics cannot be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical
condition (Criterion D). When there is strong evidence from the history, physical examination,
and/or laboratory results to suggest a plausible, proximal, and probable cause for a tic disorder, a
diagnosis of other specified tic disorder should be used.
Having previously met diagnostic criteria for Tourette’s disorder negates a possible diagnosis
of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder (Criterion E). Similarly, a previous diagnosis
of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder negates a diagnosis of provisional tic disorder
or other specified or unspecified tic disorder (Criterion E).
Prevalence
Tics are common in childhood but transient in most cases. A national survey in the United States
estimated 3 per 1,000 for the prevalence of clinically identified cases. The frequency of
identified cases was lower among African Americans and Latinx individuals, which may be
related to differences in access to care. The estimated prevalence of Tourette’s disorder in
Canada ranges from 3 to 9 per 1,000 in school-age children. Globally, males are more commonly
affected than females, with the ratio varying from 2:1 to 4:1. Epidemiological studies have
shown tics to be present in children from all continents, but exact prevalence rates are influenced
by methodological differences in research.
Development and Course
First onset of tics is typically between ages 4 and 6 years. Eye blinking is highly characteristic as
an initial symptom. Peak severity occurs between ages 10 and 12 years, with a decline in severity
during adolescence. Many adults with tic disorders experience diminished symptoms. However,
a percentage of individuals will have persistently severe or worsening symptoms in adulthood.
Tics manifest similarly in all age groups and across the lifespan. Tics wax and wane in
severity (frequency and intensity) and over time change with regard to the affected muscle
groups and nature of vocalizations. Many individuals, including young children, report that their
tics are associated with a localized bodily sensation preceding the tic and a premonitory urge to
move. It can be difficult to find words to describe these premonitory sensations and urges. Tics
associated with a premonitory urge may be experienced as not completely “involuntary” in that
the urge and the tic can be resisted. An individual may also feel the need to perform a tic
repeatedly or in a specific way until the individual feels that the tic has been done “just right.”
Often there is a feeling of relief and tension reduction following the expression of the tic or a
series of tics.
The vulnerability toward developing co-occurring conditions changes as individuals pass
through the age of risk for various co-occurring conditions. For example, prepubertal children
with tic disorders are more likely to exhibit co-occurring attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and separation anxiety disorder. Teenagers and
adults are more vulnerable to developing mood and anxiety disorders as well as substance use
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
disorders.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Early in brain development, a number of environmental risk factors have been
identified, including advanced paternal age as well as pre- and perinatal adverse events (e.g.,
impaired fetal growth, maternal intrapartum fever, maternal smoking, severe maternal
psychosocial stress, preterm birth, breech presentation, and cesarean delivery).
96
Genetic factors influence tic expression and severity. The heritability of
tic disorders is estimated to be 70%–85%, and there are no differences in familial risk or
heritability between males and females. Important risk alleles for Tourette’s disorder and rare
genetic variants in families with tic disorders have been identified. Common genetic variants
have also been identified. They are shared across tic disorders in a graded fashion that correlates
with disease severity. Indeed, tic disorders likely exist along a continuous developmental
spectrum, based on both their phenomenology and their genetic background.
Chronic tic disorders have shared genetic variance with OCD, ADHD, and other
neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder. In addition, individuals with
tic disorders are at increased risk to develop an autoimmune disorder (e.g., Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis). It is increasingly evident that the immune system and neuroinflammation play
important roles in the pathobiology of tics in at least a subset of affected individuals (e.g., those
with Sydenham's chorea). However, more work is needed to understand the biobehavioral
underpinnings and the potential causative role of infections for other neuropsychiatric conditions,
including pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome and pediatric autoimmune
neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infections.
Tics are increased by anxiety, excitement, and exhaustion and are better during
calm, focused activities. For example, many individuals typically have fewer tics when engaged
in tasks that require focused attention and motor control. Stressful/exciting events (e.g., taking a
test, participating in exciting activities) often make tics worse.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Tic disorders do not appear to vary in clinical characteristics, course, or etiology by ethnic,
racialized, and cultural background, but these backgrounds may affect how tic disorders are
perceived and managed in the family and community, influencing patterns of help seeking and
choices of treatment, such as age at presentation at specialty services. For example, preferred
social distance from individuals with tic disorders (e.g., when working or studying together) was
greater in a Korean sample than in U.S. studies.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males are more commonly affected than females, but there are no sex differences in the kinds of
tics, age at onset, or course. Women with persistent tic disorders may be more likely to
experience anxiety and depression.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Abnormal movements that may accompany other medical conditions, including other
movement disorders.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias.
A matched case-cohort study in Sweden from 1969 to 2013 demonstrated that individuals with
Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder have a substantially
increased risk of suicide attempts (odds ratio 3.86) and suicide death (odds ratio 4.39), even after
adjustment for psychiatric comorbidities, compared with matched general population control
subjects. Persistence of tics after young adulthood and a prior suicide attempt were the strongest
predictors of suicide death. Case-control data suggest that about 1 in 10 youth with persistent
(chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder has suicidal thoughts and/or behaviors, particularly in the
context of anger/frustration and associated with anxiety/depression, social problems or
withdrawal, aggression and internalizing problems, tic severity, and related impairment.
Functional Consequences of Tic Disorders
Many individuals with mild to moderate tic severity experience no distress or impairment in
functioning and may even be unaware of their tics. Individuals with more severe
97
symptoms generally have more impairment in daily living, but even individuals with moderate or
even severe tic disorders may function well. The presence of a co-occurring condition, such as
ADHD or OCD, can have greater impact on functioning than the tics themselves. Less
commonly, tics disrupt functioning in daily activities and result in social isolation, interpersonal
conflict, peer victimization, inability to work or to go to school, and lower quality of life. Often
individuals with tics have difficulty focusing their attention on work-related tasks while they are
actively trying to suppress their tics. The individual also may experience substantial
psychological distress and even suicidal thoughts. Rare complications of Tourette’s disorder
include physical injury, such as eye injury (from hitting oneself in the face), and orthopedic and
neurological injury (e.g., disc disease related to forceful head and neck movements).
Differential Diagnosis
Motor stereotypies are defined as involuntary rhythmic, repetitive, predictable movements that
appear purposeful but serve no obvious adaptive function. They are often self-soothing or
pleasurable and stop with distraction. Examples include repetitive hand waving/rotating, arm
flapping, and finger wiggling. Motor stereotypies can usually be differentiated from tics based on
the former’s earlier age at onset (often younger than 3 years), prolonged duration (seconds to
minutes), being repetitive and rhythmic in form and location, lacking a premonitory sensation or
urge, and cessation with distraction (e.g., hearing name called or being touched). Chorea
represents rapid, random, continual, abrupt, irregular, unpredictable, nonstereotyped actions that
are usually bilateral and affect all parts of the body (i.e., face, trunk, and limbs). The timing,
direction, and distribution of movements vary from moment to moment, and movements usually
worsen during attempted voluntary action. Dystonia is the simultaneous sustained contraction of
both agonist and antagonist muscles, resulting in a distorted posture or movement of parts of the
body. Dystonic postures are often triggered by attempts at voluntary movements and are not seen
during sleep.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias are characterized by episodic involuntary
Myoclonus.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Functional tic disorder.
dystonic or choreoathetoid movements that are precipitated by voluntary movement or exertion
and less commonly arise from normal background activity.
Myoclonus is characterized by a sudden unidirectional movement that is often
nonrhythmic. It may be worsened by movement and occur during sleep. Myoclonus is
differentiated from tics by its rapidity, lack of suppressibility, and absence of a premonitory
sensation or urge.
Differentiating compulsions in OCD from complex
tics may be difficult, especially because they frequently co-occur in the same individual. The
compulsions of OCD are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress and are usually
performed in response to an obsession (e.g., fear of contamination). In contrast, many individuals
with a tic disorder feel the need to perform the action in a particular fashion, equally on both
sides of the body a certain number of times or until a “just right” feeling is achieved. Body-
focused repetitive behavior disorders (i.e., persistent hair-pulling, skin-picking, nail-biting) are
more goal-directed and complex than tics.
Functional disorders should also be considered when an individual
presents with “tic attacks” that can go on for extended periods of time lasting from 15 minutes to
several hours.
Comorbidity
Many medical and psychiatric conditions have been described as co-occurring with tic disorders,
and ADHD, disruptive behavior, and OCD and related disorders are particularly
98
common. Children with ADHD may demonstrate disruptive behavior, social immaturity, and
learning difficulties that may interfere with academic progress and interpersonal relationships
and lead to greater impairment than that caused by a tic disorder. The obsessive-compulsive
symptoms observed in tic disorders tend to have an earlier age at onset and often are
characterized by a need for symmetry and exactness and/or forbidden or taboo thoughts (e.g.,
aggressive, sexual, or religious obsessions and related compulsions). Individuals with tic
disorders can also have other movement disorders (e.g., Sydenham’s chorea, stereotypic
movement disorder) and other neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions, such as autism
spectrum disorder and specific learning disorder. As noted earlier, teenagers and adults with a tic
disorder are at increased risk for developing a mood, anxiety, or substance use disorder.