Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behavior (e.g.,
hand shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, hitting own
body).
B. The repetitive motor behavior interferes with social, academic, or other activities
and may result in self-injury.
C. Onset is in the early developmental period.
D. The repetitive motor behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance or neurological condition and is not better explained by another
neurodevelopmental or mental disorder (e.g., trichotillomania [hair-pulling
disorder], obsessive-compulsive disorder).
Specify if:
With self-injurious behavior (or behavior that would result in an injury if
preventive measures were not used)
Without self-injurious behavior
Specify if:
Associated 
with 
a 
known 
genetic 
or 
other 
medical 
condition,
neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan
syndrome, intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability], intrauterine
alcohol exposure)
Coding note: Use additional code to identify the associated genetic or other
medical condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Symptoms are easily suppressed by sensory stimulus or distraction.
Moderate: Symptoms require explicit protective measures and behavioral
modification.
Severe: Continuous monitoring and protective measures are required to prevent
serious injury.
Recording Procedures
For stereotypic movement disorder that is associated with a known genetic or other medical
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic movement
disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereotypic movement
disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
Specifiers
The severity of non-self-injurious stereotypic movements ranges from mild presentations that are
easily suppressed by a sensory stimulus or distraction to continuous movements that markedly
interfere with all activities of daily living. Self-injurious behaviors range in severity along
various dimensions, including the frequency, impact on adaptive functioning, and severity of
bodily injury (from mild bruising or erythema from hitting hand against body, to lacerations or
amputation of digits, to retinal detachment from head banging).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stereotypic movement disorder is repetitive, seemingly driven, and
apparently purposeless motor behavior (Criterion A). These behaviors are often rhythmical
movements of the head, hands, or body without obvious adaptive function. The movements may
or may not respond to efforts to stop them. Among typically developing children, the repetitive
movements can usually be stopped when attention is directed to them
90
or when the child is distracted from performing them. Among children with neurodevelopmental
disorders, the behaviors are typically less responsive to such efforts. In other cases, the
individual demonstrates self-restraining behaviors (e.g., sitting on hands, wrapping arms in
clothing, finding a protective device).
The repertoire of behaviors is variable; each individual presents with his or her own
individually patterned, “signature” behavior. Examples of non-self-injurious stereotypic
movements include, but are not limited to, body rocking, bilateral flapping or rotating hand
movements, flicking or fluttering fingers in front of the face, arm waving or flapping, and head
nodding; mouth stretching is commonly seen in association with upper limb movements.
Stereotyped self-injurious behaviors include, but are not limited to, repetitive head banging, face
slapping, eye poking, and biting of hands, lips, or other body parts. Eye poking is particularly
concerning; it occurs more frequently among children with visual impairment. Multiple
movements may be combined (e.g., cocking the head, rocking the torso, waving a small string
repetitively in front of the face).
Stereotypic movements may occur many times during a day, lasting a few seconds to several
minutes or longer. Frequency can vary from many occurrences in a single day to several weeks
elapsing between episodes. The behaviors vary in context, occurring when the individual is
engrossed in other activities, when excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored. Criterion A requires that
the movements be “apparently” purposeless. However, some functions may be served by the
movements. For example, stereotypic movements might reduce anxiety in response to external
stressors.
Criterion B requires that the stereotypic movements interfere with social, academic, or other
activities and, in some children, may result in self-injury (or would if protective measures were
not used). The presence or absence of self-injurious behavior should be indicated using the
specifiers “with self-injurious behavior” or “without self-injurious behavior.” Onset of
stereotypic movements is in the early developmental period (Criterion C). Criterion D requires
that the repetitive, stereotyped behavior in stereotypic movement disorder is not attributable to
the physiological effects of a substance or neurological condition and is not better explained by
another neurodevelopmental or mental disorder. The presence of stereotypic movements may
indicate an undetected neurodevelopmental problem, especially in children ages 1–3 years.
Prevalence
Simple stereotypic movements (e.g., rocking) are common in young typically developing
children (e.g., 5%–19% in the United Kingdom and United States). Complex stereotypic
movements are much less common (occurring in approximately 3%–4%). Between 4% and 16%
of individuals with intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) in samples from
high-income countries engage in stereotypy and self-injury. The risk is greater in individuals
with severe intellectual developmental disorder. Among individuals with intellectual
developmental disorder living in residential facilities, 10%–15% may have stereotypic
movement disorder with self-injury. Repetitive and restricted behaviors and interests may be risk
markers for the onset of self-injury, aggression, and destruction in children with severe
intellectual developmental disorder.
Development and Course
Stereotypic movements typically begin within the first 3 years of life. Simple stereotypic
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normal development.
movements are common in infancy and may be involved in acquisition of motor mastery. In
children who develop complex motor stereotypies, approximately 80% exhibit symptoms before
age 24 months, 12% between 24 and 35 months, and 8% at 36 months or older. In most typically
developing children, the severity and frequency of stereotyped movements diminish over time.
Onset of complex motor stereotypies may be in infancy or later in the developmental period.
Among individuals with intellectual developmental
91
disorder, the stereotyped, self-injurious behaviors may persist for years, even though the
typography or pattern of self-injury may change.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Social isolation is a risk factor for self-stimulation that may progress to
stereotypic movements with repetitive self-injury. Environmental stress may also trigger
stereotypic behavior. Fear may alter physiological state, resulting in increased frequency of
stereotypic behaviors.
Stereotypic movement disorder is believed to be somewhat heritable
based on the high frequency of cases that have a positive family history of motor stereotypies.
Significant reduction in the putamen volume in children with stereotypies suggests that distinct
cortical-striatal pathways associated with habitual behaviors (i.e., premotor to posterior putamen
circuits) may be the underlying anatomical site in complex motor stereotypies. Lower cognitive
functioning is linked to greater risk for stereotypic behaviors and poorer response to
interventions. Stereotypic movements are more frequent among individuals with moderate-to-
severe/profound intellectual developmental disorder, who by virtue of a particular syndrome
(e.g., Rett syndrome) or environmental factor (e.g., an environment with relatively insufficient
stimulation) seem to be at higher risk for stereotypies. Repetitive self-injurious behavior may be
a behavioral phenotype in neurogenetic syndromes. For example, in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome,
there are both stereotypic dystonic movements and self-mutilation of fingers, lip biting, and other
forms of self-injury unless the individual is restrained, and in Rett syndrome and Cornelia de
Lange syndrome, self-injury may result from the hand-to-mouth stereotypies. Stereotypic
behaviors may also result from a painful medical condition (e.g., middle ear infection, dental
problems, gastroesophageal reflux).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Stereotypic repetitive behaviors, with or without self-injury, variedly manifest in many cultures.
Cultural attitudes toward unusual behaviors may result in delayed diagnosis. Overall cultural
tolerance and attitudes toward stereotypic movement vary and must be considered.
Differential Diagnosis
Simple stereotypic movements are common in infancy and early childhood.
Rocking may occur in the transition from sleep to awake, a behavior that usually resolves with
age. Complex stereotypies are less common in typically developing children and can usually be
suppressed by distraction or sensory stimulation. The individual’s daily routine is rarely affected,
Autism spectrum disorder.
Tic disorders.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Other neurological and medical conditions.
and the movements generally do not cause the child distress. The diagnosis would not be
appropriate in these circumstances.
Stereotypic movements may be a presenting symptom of autism
spectrum disorder and should be considered when repetitive movements and behaviors are being
evaluated. Deficits of social communication and reciprocity manifesting in autism spectrum
disorder are generally absent in stereotypic movement disorder, and thus social interaction, social
communication, and rigid repetitive behaviors and interests are distinguishing features. When
autism spectrum disorder is present, stereotypic movement disorder is diagnosed only when there
is self-injury or when the stereotypic behaviors are sufficiently severe to become a focus of
treatment.
Typically, stereotypies have an earlier age at onset (before 3 years) than do tics,
which have a mean age at onset of 4–6 years. They also are consistent and fixed in their pattern
or topography compared with tics, which are variable in their presentation,
92
typically changing in character over time. Stereotypies may involve arms, hands, or the entire
body, while tics commonly involve eyes, face, head, and shoulders. Stereotypies are more fixed,
rhythmic, and prolonged in duration than tics, which, generally, are brief, rapid, random, and
fluctuating. Stereotypies are ego-syntonic (children enjoy them) as opposed to tics, which are
usually ego-dystonic. Tics wax and wane in location and time and are uniquely associated with
premonitory urge (a physical feeling that precedes many tic movements). Tics and stereotypic
movements are both reduced by distraction.
Stereotypic movement disorder is distinguished from
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) by the absence of obsessions, as well as by the nature of
the repetitive behaviors. In OCD the individual feels driven to perform repetitive behaviors in
response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly, whereas in
stereotypic movement disorder the behaviors are seemingly driven but apparently purposeless.
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder are characterized
by body-focused repetitive behaviors (i.e., hair pulling and skin picking) that may be seemingly
driven but that are not apparently purposeless, and that may not be patterned or rhythmical.
Furthermore, onset in trichotillomania and excoriation disorder is not typically in the early
developmental period, but rather around puberty or later.
The diagnosis of stereotypic movements requires the
exclusion of habits, mannerisms, paroxysmal dyskinesias, and benign hereditary chorea. A
neurological history and examination are required to assess features suggestive of other
disorders, such as myoclonus, dystonia, tics, and chorea. Involuntary movements associated with
a neurological condition may be distinguished by their signs and symptoms. For example,
repetitive, stereotypic movements in tardive dyskinesia can be distinguished by a history of
chronic neuroleptic use and characteristic oral or facial dyskinesia or irregular trunk or limb
movements. These types of movements do not result in self-injury. Stereotypies are a common
manifestation of a variety of neurogenetic disorders, such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Rett
syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and Smith-Magenis syndrome. For
stereotypic movement disorder that is associated with a known genetic or other medical
Substance-induced repetitive behaviors.
Functional (conversion) stereotypies.
F95.2
F95.1
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic movement
disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereotypic movement
disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
A diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
appropriate for repetitive skin picking or scratching associated with amphetamine intoxication or
abuse. In such cases, the diagnosis substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder would apply.
Stereotyped 
movements 
must 
be 
distinguished 
from
functional (conversion) movements. Sudden onset, distractibility, changing pattern with
unexplained improvement or aggravation, and the coexistence of other symptoms of functional
neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder) are some of the typical features that help
identify functional stereotypies.
Comorbidity
Common comorbidities in children with chronic motor stereotypies include attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder, motor coordination problems, tics/Tourette’s disorder, and anxiety.
93