Differential Diagnosis
 Deception to avoid legal liability.
 Caregivers who lie about abuse injuries in dependents solely to
 protect themselves from liability are not diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on another
 because protection from liability is an external reward (Criterion C, the deceptive behavior is
 evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards). Such caregivers who, upon
 observation, analysis of medical records, and/or interviews with others, are found to lie more
 extensively than needed for immediate self-protection are diagnosed with factitious disorder
 imposed on another.
 Somatic symptom and related disorders.
 In somatic symptom disorder and the care-seeking type of
 illness anxiety disorder, there may be excessive attention and treatment seeking for perceived
 medical concerns, but there is no evidence that the individual is providing false information or
 behaving deceptively.
 Malingering.
 Malingering is differentiated from factitious disorder by the intentional reporting of
 symptoms for personal gain (e.g., money, time off work). In contrast, the diagnosis of factitious
 disorder requires that the illness falsification is not fully accounted for by external rewards.
 Factitious disorder and malingering are not mutually exclusive, however. The motives in any
 single case might be multiple and shifting depending on the circumstances and reactions of
 others.
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 Borderline personality disorder.
 Medical condition or mental disorder not associated with intentional symptom falsification.
 Functional neurological symptom
 disorder is characterized by neurological symptoms that are inconsistent with neurological
 pathophysiology. Factitious disorder with neurological symptoms is distinguished from
 functional neurological symptom disorder by evidence of deceptive falsification of symptoms.
 Deliberate physical self-harm in the absence of suicidal intent can
 also occur in association with other mental disorders such as borderline personality disorder.
 Factitious disorder requires that the induction of injury occur in association with deception.
 Presentation
 of signs and symptoms of illness that do not conform to an identifiable medical condition or
 mental disorder increases the likelihood of the presence of a factitious disorder. However, the
 diagnosis of factitious disorder does not exclude the
 370
 presence of a true medical condition or mental disorder, as comorbid illness often occurs in the
 individual along with factitious disorder. For example, individuals who might manipulate blood
 sugar levels to produce symptoms may also have diabetes.
 