Differential Diagnosis
 Recognized neurological disease.
 The main differential diagnosis is recognized neurological
 disease that might better explain the symptoms. After a thorough neurological assessment, an
 unexpected neurological disease cause for the symptoms is rarely found at follow-up. However,
 reassessment may be required if the symptoms appear to be progressive. Functional neurological
 symptom disorder commonly coexists with recognized neurological disease and may be part of
 the prodromal state of some progressive neurological diseases.
 Somatic symptom disorder.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder may be diagnosed in
 addition to somatic symptom disorder. Most of the somatic symptoms
 364
 encountered in somatic symptom disorder cannot be demonstrated to be clearly incompatible
 with recognized neurological or medical disease, whereas in functional neurological symptom
 disorder, such incompatibility is required for the diagnosis.
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder describes genuinely
 experienced symptoms that are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned). However, definite
Dissociative disorders.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 Depressive disorders.
 Panic disorder.
 F54
 evidence of feigning (e.g., marked discrepancy between reported and observed activities of daily
 living) would suggest malingering if the individual’s apparent aim is to obtain an obvious
 external reward, or factitious disorder in the absence of such reward.
 Dissociative symptoms are common in individuals with functional
 neurological symptom disorder. If both functional neurological symptom disorder and a
 dissociative disorder are present, both diagnoses should be made.
 Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are excessively concerned
 about a perceived defect in their physical appearance but do not complain of symptoms of
 sensory or motor functioning in the affected body part.
 In depressive disorders, individuals may report general heaviness of their
 limbs, whereas the weakness of functional neurological symptom disorder is more focal and
 prominent. Depressive disorders are also differentiated by the presence of core depressive
 symptoms.
 Episodic neurological symptoms (e.g., tremor and paresthesia) can occur in both
 functional neurological symptom disorder and panic attacks. In panic attacks, the neurological
 symptoms are typically associated with characteristic cardiorespiratory symptoms and retained
 awareness. Loss of awareness with amnesia for the attack occurs in functional seizures but not in
 panic attacks.