Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 The first differential diagnostic consideration is an underlying medical
 condition, including neurological or endocrine conditions, occult malignancies, and other
 diseases that affect multiple body systems. The presence of a medical condition does not rule out
 the possibility of coexisting illness anxiety disorder. If a medical condition is present, the health
related anxiety and disease concerns are clearly disproportionate to its seriousness. Transient
 preoccupations related to a medical condition do not constitute illness anxiety disorder.
 Adjustment disorders.
 Health-related anxiety is a normal response to serious illness and is not a
 mental disorder. Such nonpathological health anxiety is clearly related to the medical condition
 and is typically time-limited. If the health anxiety is severe enough to cause clinically significant
 distress or impairment in one or more important areas of functioning, an adjustment disorder
 may be diagnosed. However, if disproportionate health-related anxiety persists for longer than 6
 months, a diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder may apply.
 Somatic symptom disorder.
 Both somatic symptom disorder and illness anxiety disorder may be
 characterized by a high level of anxiety about health and excessive health-related behaviors.
 They are differentiated by the fact that somatic symptom disorder requires the presence of
 somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life, whereas in
 illness anxiety disorder, somatic symptoms either are not present or, if present, are only mild in
 intensity.
 Anxiety disorders.
 In generalized anxiety disorder, individuals worry about multiple events,
 situations, or activities, only one of which may involve health. In panic disorder, the individual
 may be concerned that the panic attacks reflect the presence of a medical illness; however,
 although these individuals may have health anxiety, their anxiety is typically very acute and
 episodic. In illness anxiety disorder, the health anxiety and fears are more persistent and
 enduring. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may experience panic attacks that are
 triggered by their illness concerns.
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have
 intrusive thoughts about having a disease and also may have associated compulsive behaviors
Major depressive disorder.
 Psychotic disorders.
 (e.g., seeking reassurance). However, in illness anxiety disorder, the preoccupations are usually
 focused on having a disease, whereas in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), the thoughts are
 intrusive and are usually focused on fears of getting a disease in the future. Most individuals with
 OCD have obsessions or compulsions
 360
 involving other concerns in addition to fears about contracting disease. In body dysmorphic
 disorder, concerns are limited to the individual’s physical appearance, which is viewed as
 defective or flawed.
 Some individuals with a major depressive episode ruminate about their
 health and worry excessively about illness. A separate diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is not
 made if these concerns occur only during major depressive episodes. However, if excessive
 illness worry persists after remission of an episode of major depressive disorder, the diagnosis of
 illness anxiety disorder should be considered.
 Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are not delusional and can
 acknowledge the possibility that the feared disease is not present. Their ideas do not attain the
 rigidity and intensity seen in the somatic delusions occurring in psychotic disorders (e.g.,
 schizophrenia; delusional disorder, somatic type; major depressive disorder, with psychotic
 features). True somatic delusions are generally more bizarre (e.g., that an organ is rotting or
 dead) than the concerns seen in illness anxiety disorder. The concerns seen in illness anxiety
 disorder, though not founded in reality, are plausible.
 