Differential Diagnosis
 Mental disorder due to another medical condition.
 A temporal association between symptoms of a
 mental disorder and those of a medical condition is also characteristic of a mental disorder due to
 another medical condition, but the presumed causality is in the opposite direction. In a mental
disorder due to another medical condition, the medical condition is judged to be causing the
 mental disorder through a direct physiological mechanism. In psychological factors affecting
 other medical conditions, the psychological or behavioral factors are judged to affect the course
 of the medical condition.
 Adjustment disorders.
 Abnormal psychological or behavioral symptoms that develop in response
 to a medical condition are more properly coded as an adjustment disorder (a clinically significant
 psychological response to an identifiable stressor). For example, an individual with angina that is
 precipitated whenever he becomes enraged would be diagnosed as having psychological factors
 affecting other medical conditions, whereas an individual with angina who developed
 maladaptive anticipatory anxiety would be diagnosed as having an adjustment disorder with
 anxiety. In clinical practice, however, psychological factors and a medical condition are often
 mutually exacerbating (e.g., anxiety as both a precipitant and a consequence of angina), in which
 case the distinction is arbitrary. Other mental disorders frequently result in medical
 complications, most notably substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol use disorder, tobacco use
 disorder). If an individual has a coexisting major mental disorder that adversely affects or causes
 another medical condition, diagnoses of the mental disorder and the medical condition are
 usually sufficient. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is diagnosed when
 the psychological traits or behaviors do not meet criteria for a mental diagnosis.
 Somatic symptom disorder.
 Somatic symptom disorder is characterized by a combination of
 distressing somatic symptoms and excessive or maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in
 response to these symptoms or associated health concerns. The individual may or may not have a
 diagnosable medical condition. In contrast, in psychological factors
 367
 affecting other medical conditions, the psychological factors adversely affect a medical
 condition; the individual’s thoughts, feelings, and behavior are not necessarily excessive. The
 difference is one of emphasis, rather than a clear-cut distinction. In psychological factors
 affecting other medical conditions, the emphasis is on the exacerbation of the medical condition
 (e.g., an individual with angina that is precipitated whenever he becomes anxious). In somatic
 symptom disorder, the emphasis is on maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior (e.g., an
 individual with angina who worries constantly that she will have a heart attack, takes her blood
 pressure multiple times per day, and restricts her activities).
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by high illness anxiety that is
 distressing and/or disruptive to daily life with minimal somatic symptoms. The focus of clinical
 concern is the individual’s worry about having a disease; in most cases, no serious disease is
 present. In psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, anxiety may be a relevant
 psychological factor affecting a medical condition, but the clinical concern is the adverse effects
 on the medical condition.