Differential Diagnosis
 If the somatic symptoms are consistent with another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder), and
 the diagnostic criteria for that disorder are fulfilled, then that mental disorder should be
 considered as an alternative or additional diagnosis. If, as commonly occurs, the criteria for both
 somatic symptom disorder and another mental disorder diagnosis are fulfilled, then both should
 be diagnosed, as both may require treatment.
 Other medical conditions.
 The presence of somatic symptoms of unclear etiology is not in itself
 sufficient to make the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. The symptoms of many
 individuals with disorders like irritable bowel syndrome or fibromyalgia would not satisfy the
 criterion necessary to diagnose somatic symptom disorder (Criterion B). Conversely, the
 presence of somatic symptoms of an established medical condition (e.g., diabetes or heart
 disease) does not exclude the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder if the criteria are otherwise
 met. Factors that distinguish individuals with somatic symptom disorder from individuals with
 general medical conditions alone include the ineffectiveness of analgesics, a history of mental
 disorders, unclear provocative or palliative factors, persistence without cessation, and stress.
 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
 The diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder
 requires distressing or impairing somatic symptoms that may or may not be associated with
 another medical condition but must be accompanied by excessive or disproportionate thoughts,
 feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns. In contrast,
the diagnosis of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions requires the presence of
 a medical condition, as well as psychological factors that adversely affect its course or interfere
 with its treatment.
 Panic disorder.
 In panic disorder, somatic symptoms and anxiety about health tend to occur in
 acute episodes, whereas in somatic symptom disorder, anxiety and somatic symptoms are more
 persistent.
 Generalized anxiety disorder.
 Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry about multiple
 events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health. The main focus is not
 usually somatic symptoms or fear of illness as it is in somatic symptom disorder.
 356
 Depressive disorders.
 Depressive disorders are commonly accompanied by somatic symptoms
 such as fatigue, headaches, or joint, abdominal, or other pains. However, depressive disorders are
 differentiated from somatic symptom disorder by the requirement of the presence of depressed
 mood or, in the case of major depressive disorder, either depressed mood or decreased interest or
 pleasure in activities. In some cultural contexts, these core symptoms of depression may be
 initially denied or deemphasized by individuals whose presentations would otherwise meet
 criteria for a depressive disorder. Such individuals might instead emphasize somatic symptoms
 that may be idiomatic (e.g., heavy heart) and unfamiliar to clinicians.
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 If the individual has extensive worries about health but no or minimal
 somatic symptoms, it may be more appropriate to consider illness anxiety disorder.
 In functional neurological symptom
 Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 disorder, the presenting symptom is loss of function (e.g., of a limb), whereas in somatic
 symptom disorder, the focus is on the distress that particular symptoms cause. The features listed
 under Criterion B of somatic symptom disorder may be helpful in differentiating the two
 disorders.
 Delusional disorder.
 In somatic symptom disorder, the individual’s beliefs that somatic symptoms
 might reflect serious underlying physical illness are not held with delusional intensity.
 Nonetheless, the individual’s beliefs concerning the somatic symptoms can be firmly held. In
 contrast, in delusional disorder, somatic type, the individual’s conviction that the somatic
 symptoms are indicative of having a serious underlying illness is stronger than that found in
 somatic symptom disorder.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 In body dysmorphic disorder, the individual is excessively concerned
 about, and preoccupied by, a perceived defect in his or her physical appearance. In contrast, in
 somatic symptom disorder, the concern about somatic symptoms reflects fear of underlying
 illness, not of a defect in appearance.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 In somatic symptom disorder, the recurrent ideas about somatic
 symptoms or illness are less intrusive, and individuals with this disorder do not exhibit the
 associated repetitive behaviors aimed at reducing anxiety that occur in obsessive-compulsive
 disorder.
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 In factitious disorder and malingering, individuals present
 themselves as ill or impaired but have falsified presenting physical signs and symptoms with the
F45.21
 intent to deceive. In contrast, the symptoms of somatic symptom disorder are not simulated or
 self-induced, and these individuals suffer authentically and seriously from their somatic
 complaints.
 