Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:
 1. Delusions.
 2. Hallucinations.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder that is not
 substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent psychotic
 disorder could include the following:
 The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
 the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
 evidence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced psychotic
 disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related
 episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
 clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 psychotic disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
 the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a
 substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced psychotic disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and
 the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance
induced psychotic disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced
 psychotic disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced psychotic disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and
 the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe
 [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use
 disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy
 use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should
 record only the substance-induced psychotic disorder.
 127
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.159 F10.259 F10.959
 Cannabis F12.159 F12.259 F12.959
 Phencyclidine F16.159 F16.259 F16.959
 Other hallucinogen F16.159 F16.259 F16.959
 Inhalant F18.159 F18.259 F18.959
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.159 F13.259 F13.959
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.159 F15.259 F15.959
 Cocaine F14.159 F14.259 F14.959
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.159 F19.259 F19.959
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
 substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
 medication.
Specify current severity:
 Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
 and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
 severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not
 present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
 Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can be
 made without using this severity specifier.
 Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins with the specific
 substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delusions or
 hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is
 based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For
 substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other (or
 unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
 etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
 used.
 128
 When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
 listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
 psychotic disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
 during withdrawal). For example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxication in a man
 with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.259 severe cocaine use disorder with
 cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication. A separate diagnosis of the
 comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced psychotic disorder
 occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the
 substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.959 phencyclidine
induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is
 judged to play a significant role in the development of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed
 separately (e.g., F12.259 severe cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced psychotic disorder,
 with onset during intoxication; F16.159 mild phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine
induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder are prominent
 delusions and/or hallucinations (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the physiological
 effects of a substance/medication (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure)
 (Criterion B). Hallucinations that the individual realizes are substance/medication-induced are
 not included here and instead would be diagnosed as substance intoxication or substance
 withdrawal with the accompanying specifier “with perceptual disturbances” (applies to alcohol
withdrawal; cannabis intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and stimulant
 intoxication).
 A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is distinguished from an independent
 psychotic disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse, there
 must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of substance use,
 intoxication, or withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorders arise during or
 soon after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication or after substance intoxication or
 withdrawal but can persist for weeks, whereas independent psychotic disorders may precede the
 onset of substance/medication use or may occur during times of sustained abstinence. Once
 initiated, the psychotic symptoms may continue as long as the substance/medication use
 continues. Another consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of an independent
 psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the appearance of
 delusions de novo in a male person older than 35 years without a known history of an
 independent psychotic disorder should suggest the possibility of a substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder. Even a prior history of an independent psychotic disorder does not rule out
 the possibility of a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. In contrast, factors that
 suggest that the psychotic symptoms are better accounted for by an independent psychotic
 disorder include persistence of psychotic symptoms for a substantial period of time (i.e., a month
 or more) after the end of substance intoxication or acute substance withdrawal or after cessation
 of medication use; or a history of prior recurrent independent psychotic disorders. Other causes
 of psychotic symptoms must be considered even in an individual with substance intoxication or
 withdrawal, because substance use problems are not uncommon among individuals with non
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorders.
 In addition to the two symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria (i.e.,
 delusions and hallucinations), the assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom
 domains is vital for making critically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia
 spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 129
 Associated Features
 Psychotic disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
 substances: alcohol; cannabis; hallucinogens, including phencyclidine and related substances;
 inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or
 unknown) substances. Psychotic disorders can occur in association with withdrawal from the
 following classes of substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other (or
 unknown) substances.
 Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics and
 analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive and
 cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medications,
 chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine, procarbazine), corticosteroids, gastrointestinal
 medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, other over-the
counter medications (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine), antidepressant medication, and
 disulfiram. Toxins reported to induce psychotic symptoms include anticholinesterase,
organophosphate insecticides, sarin and other nerve gases, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and
 volatile substances such as fuel or paint.
 Prevalence
 Prevalence of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder in the general population is
 unknown. Between 7% and 25% of individuals presenting with a first episode of psychosis in
 different settings are reported to have substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 Development and Course
 The initiation of the psychotic symptoms may vary considerably with the substance. For
 example, smoking a high dose of cocaine may produce psychosis within minutes, whereas days
 or weeks of high-dose alcohol or sedative use may be required to produce psychosis. Alcohol
induced psychotic disorder, with hallucinations, usually occurs only after prolonged, heavy
 ingestion of alcohol in individuals who have moderate to severe alcohol use disorder, and the
 hallucinations are generally auditory in nature.
 Psychotic disorders induced by amphetamine-type substances and cocaine share similar
 clinical features. Persecutory delusions may rapidly develop shortly after use of amphetamine or
 a similarly acting sympathomimetic. The hallucination of bugs or vermin crawling in or under
 the skin (formication) can lead to scratching and extensive skin excoriations. Cannabis-induced
 psychotic disorder may develop shortly after high-dose cannabis use and usually involves
 persecutory delusions, marked anxiety, emotional lability, and depersonalization. The disorder
 usually remits within a day but in some cases may persist longer.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder may at times persist when the offending
 agent is removed, such that it may be difficult initially to distinguish it from an independent
 psychotic disorder. Agents such as amphetamine-type substances, phencyclidine, and cocaine
 have been reported to evoke temporary psychotic states that can sometimes persist for weeks or
 longer despite removal of the agent and treatment with neuroleptic medication. In later life,
 polypharmacy for medical conditions and exposure to medications for parkinsonism,
 cardiovascular disease, and other medical disorders may be associated with a greater likelihood
 of psychosis induced by prescription medications as opposed to substances of abuse.
 According to data from a Danish registry study that followed cases of substance-induced
 psychosis longitudinally over 20 years, roughly one-third (32%) of individuals with substance
induced psychosis are later diagnosed with a schizophrenia spectrum disorder (26%) or a bipolar
 disorder (8%), with the highest rate (44%) for cannabis-induced psychotic disorder.
 130
 Diagnostic Markers
 With substances for which relevant blood levels are available (e.g., blood alcohol level, other
 quantifiable blood levels such as digoxin), the presence of a level consistent with toxicity may
 increase diagnostic certainty.
 Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic
 Disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is typically severely disabling and
 consequently is observed most frequently in emergency departments, as individuals are often
 brought to the acute-care setting when it occurs. However, the disability is typically self-limited
 and resolves upon removal of the offending agent.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal.
 Individuals intoxicated with stimulants, cannabis,
 the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alcohol or sedatives, may
 experience altered perceptions that they recognize as drug effects. If reality testing for these
 experiences remains intact (i.e., the individual recognizes that the perception is substance
 induced and neither believes in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is not substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or substance withdrawal, with perceptual
 disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxication, with perceptual disturbances). “Flashback”
 hallucinations that can occur long after the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as
 hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic
 symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol
 withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium
 and are not diagnosed separately. Delusions in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive
 disorder would be diagnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral
 disturbance.
 Independent psychotic disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced 
psychotic 
disorder 
is
 distinguished from an independent psychotic disorder, such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
 disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizophrenia spectrum
 and other psychotic disorder, or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
 disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms.
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition.
 A substance/medication-induced psychotic
 disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its
 onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if there is a
 withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with medical
 conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility
 that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical
 condition itself rather than the medication, in which case psychotic disorder due to another
 medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a
 judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication
 substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for that individual
 whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance
 is attributable to both a medical condition and substance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e.,
 psychotic disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic
 disorder) may be given.
 Other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
 The 
psychotic
 symptoms included in the diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psy-chotic disorder are
 limited to either delusions or hallucinations. Individuals with other
 131
substance-induced psychotic symptoms (e.g., disorganized or catatonic behavior; disorganized
 speech; incoherence or irrational content) should be classified in the category other specified or
 unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.