Schizoaffective Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode
 (major depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.
 Note: The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed
 mood.
B. Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood
 episode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness.
 C. Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the
 majority of the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.
 D. The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of
 abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
 Specify whether:
 F25.0 Bipolar type: This subtype applies if a manic episode is part of the
 presentation. Major depressive episodes may also occur.
 F25.1 Depressive type: This subtype applies if only major depressive episodes
 are part of the presentation.
 Specify if:
 With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
 disorder, p. 135, for definition).
 Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with
 schizoaffective disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
 Specify if:
 The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the
 disorder and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
 122
 First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder
 meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a
 time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
 First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period
 during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in
 which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
 First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time
 after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are
 present.
 Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be
 determined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a
 remission and a minimum of one relapse).
 Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
 Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
 Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder
 are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom
 periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
 Unspecified
 Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
 psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
 be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
 scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
 Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder can be made without using this
 severity specifier.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is based on the assessment of an uninterrupted period
 of illness during which the individual continues to display active or residual symptoms of
 psychotic illness. The diagnosis is usually, but not necessarily, made during the period of
 psychotic illness. At some time during the period, Criterion A for schizophrenia has to be met.
 Criteria B (social dysfunction), C (6-month duration), and F (exclusion of autism spectrum
 disorder or other communication disorder of childhood onset) for schizophrenia do not have to
 be met. In addition to meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia, there is a major mood episode
 (major depressive or manic) (Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder). Because loss of interest or
 pleasure is common in schizophrenia, to meet Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder, the major
 depressive episode must include pervasive depressed mood (i.e., the presence of markedly
 diminished interest or pleasure is not sufficient). Episodes of depression or mania are present for
 the majority of the total duration of the illness (i.e., after Criterion A has been met) (Criterion C
 for schizoaffective disorder). To separate schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar
 disorder with psychotic features, delusions or hallucinations must be present for at least 2 weeks
 in the absence of a major mood episode (depressive or manic) at some point during the lifetime
 duration of the illness (Criterion B for schizoaffective disorder). The symptoms must not be
 attributable to the effects of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion D for
 schizoaffective disorder).
 Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder specifies that mood symptoms meeting criteria for a
 major mood episode must be present for the majority of the total duration of the active and
 residual portion of the illness. Criterion C requires the assessment of mood symptoms for the
 entire lifetime course of a psychotic illness. If the mood symptoms are present
 123
 for only a relatively brief period, the diagnosis is schizophrenia, not schizoaffective disorder.
 When deciding whether an individual’s presentation meets Criterion C, the clinician should
 review the total duration of psychotic illness (i.e., both active and residual symptoms) and
 determine when significant mood symptoms (untreated or in need of treatment with
 antidepressant and/or mood-stabilizing medication) accompanied the psychotic symptoms. This
 determination requires sufficient historical information and clinical judgment. For example, an
 individual with a 4-year history of active and residual symptoms of schizophrenia develops
 depressive and manic episodes that, taken together, do not occupy more than 1 year during the 4
year history of psychotic illness. This presentation would not meet Criterion C.
 In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
 assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
 important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Associated Features
 Occupational and social functioning is frequently impaired, but this is not a defining criterion (in
 contrast to schizophrenia). Restricted social contact and difficulties with self-care are associated
 with schizoaffective disorder, but negative symptoms may be less severe and less persistent than
 those seen in schizophrenia. Anosognosia (i.e., poor insight) is also common in schizoaffective
 disorder, but the deficits in insight may be less severe and pervasive than those in schizophrenia.
 Individuals with schizoaffective disorder may be at increased risk for later developing episodes
 of major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder if mood symptoms continue following the
 remission of symptoms meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia. There may be associated alcohol
 and other substance-related disorders.
 There are no tests or biological measures that can provide definitive assistance in making the
 diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. Neuropsychological testing typically shows cognitive
 deficits in areas such as executive function, verbal memory, and speed of processing, and these
 may be less pronounced than in schizophrenia. Schizoaffective disorder is often characterized by
 gray matter volume loss on brain imaging, in much the same way that schizophrenia is.
 Prevalence
 Schizoaffective disorder appears to be about one-third as common as schizophrenia. Lifetime
 prevalence of schizoaffective disorder was estimated to be 0.3% in a Finnish sample and is
 higher in women than in men when DSM-IV diagnostic criteria were used. This rate would be
 expected to be lower because of the more stringent requirement of DSM-5 Criterion C (i.e.,
 mood symptoms meeting criteria for a major mood episode must be present for the majority of
 the total duration of the active and residual portion of the illness).
 Development and Course
 The typical age at onset of schizoaffective disorder is early adulthood, although onset can occur
 anytime from adolescence to late in life. A significant number of individuals diagnosed with
 another psychotic illness initially will receive the diagnosis schizoaffective disorder later when
 the pattern of mood episodes has become more apparent, whereas others may be diagnosed with
 mood disorders before independent psychotic symptoms are detected.
 Conversely, some individuals will have a change in diagnosis from schizoaffective disorder
 to a mood disorder or to schizophrenia over time. A change in diagnosis from schizoaffective
 disorder to schizophrenia was more common than a change to mood disorder
 124
 under DSM-IV criteria, and that difference is expected to be more pronounced under DSM-5
 as the current Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder has become more stringent, requiring
 mood symptoms to be present for the majority of the illness as compared with the DSM-IV
 definition, which only required mood symptoms to be present for a “substantial” portion. The
prognosis for schizoaffective disorder is somewhat better than the prognosis for schizophrenia
 but worse than the prognosis for mood disorders.
 Schizoaffective disorder may occur in a variety of temporal patterns. The following is a
 typical pattern: An individual may have pronounced auditory hallucinations and persecutory
 delusions for 2 months before the onset of a prominent major depressive episode. The psychotic
 symptoms and the full major depressive episode are then present for 4 months. Then, the
 individual recovers completely from the major depressive episode, but the psychotic symptoms
 persist for another month before they too disappear. During this period of illness, the individual’s
 symptoms concurrently met criteria for a major depressive episode and Criterion A for
 schizophrenia, and during this same period of illness, auditory hallucinations and delusions were
 present both before and after the depressive phase. The total period of illness lasted for about 7
 months, with psychotic symptoms alone present during the initial 2 months, both depressive and
 psychotic symptoms present during the next 4 months, and psychotic symptoms alone present
 during the last month. In this instance, the depressive episode was present for a majority of the
 total duration of the psychotic disturbance, and thus the presentation qualifies for a diagnosis of
 schizoaffective disorder.
 The temporal relationship between the mood symptoms and the psychotic symptoms across
 the lifespan is variable. Depressive or manic symptoms can occur before the onset of psychosis,
 during acute psychotic episodes, during residual periods, and after cessation of psychosis. For
 example, an individual might present with prominent mood symptoms during the prodromal
 stage of schizophrenia. This pattern is not necessarily indicative of schizoaffective disorder,
 since it is the co-occurrence of psychotic and mood symptoms that is diagnostic. For an
 individual with symptoms that clearly meet the criteria for schizoaffective disorder but who on
 further follow-up only presents with residual psychotic symptoms (such as subthreshold
 psychosis and/or prominent negative symptoms), the diagnosis may be changed to schizophrenia,
 as the total proportion of psychotic illness compared with mood symptoms becomes more
 prominent. Schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type, may be more common in young adults,
 whereas schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, may be more common in older adults.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Among individuals with schizophrenia, there may be an increased risk
 for schizoaffective disorder in first-degree relatives. The risk for schizoaffective disorder may
 also be increased among individuals who have a first-degree relative with bipolar disorder or
 schizoaffective disorder itself. The molecular genetic composite signatures known as polygenic
 risk scores for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder may all be elevated
 in schizoaffective disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual and the
 clinician do not share the same cultural and economic background. Ideas that appear to be
 delusional in one cultural context (e.g., evil eye, causing illness through curses, influences of
 spirits) may be commonly held in others. There is also some evidence in the literature that
 African American and Hispanic populations whose symptoms meet criteria for schizoaffective
 disorder are more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia. To mitigate the impact of clinician
bias, care must be taken to ensure a comprehensive evaluation that includes both psychotic and
 mood symptoms.
 125
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 The lifetime risk of suicide for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder is 5%, and the
 presence of depressive symptoms is correlated with a higher risk for suicide. There is evidence
 that suicide rates are higher in North American populations than in European, Eastern European,
 South American, and Indian populations of individuals with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
 disorder.
 Functional Consequences of Schizoaffective Disorder
 Schizoaffective disorder is associated with global dysfunction, including in social and
 occupational domains, but dysfunction is not a diagnostic criterion (as it is for schizophrenia),
 and there is substantial variability between individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 A wide variety of psychiatric and medical conditions
 can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms and must be considered in the differential
 diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. These include delirium; major neurocognitive disorder;
 substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocognitive disorder; bipolar disorders,
 with psychotic features; major depressive disorder, with psychotic features; depressive or bipolar
 disorders, with catatonic features; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality disorder; brief
 psychotic disorder; schizophreniform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional disorder; and other
 specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition.
 Other medical conditions and substance use can
 manifest with a combination of psychotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychotic disorder due
 to another medical condition needs to be excluded.
 Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders.
 Distinguishing schizoaffective disorder from
 schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features is often
 difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and
 Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar
 disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished
 from a major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features based on the presence of
 prominent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood
 episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, the psychotic
 features only occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative proportion of mood to
 psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis may change from and to
 schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and
 prominent major depressive episode lasting 4 months during the first 6 months of a chronic
 psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual
 symptoms persist over several years without a recurrence of another mood episode.) Achieving
 greater clarity about the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms over time and about
their concurrence may require collateral information from medical records and from informants.
 Comorbidity
 Many individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder are also diagnosed with other mental
 disorders, especially substance use disorders and anxiety disorders. Similarly, the incidence of
 medical conditions, including metabolic syndrome, is increased above base rate for the general
 population and leads to decreased life expectancy.
 126