Delusional Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.
 B. Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.
 Note: Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the
 delusional theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated
 with delusions of infestation).
 105
 C. Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not
 markedly impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.
 D. If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief
 relative to the duration of the delusional periods.
 E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
 another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental
 disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Specify whether:
 Erotomanic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
 is that another person is in love with the individual.
Grandiose type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is
 the conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or having
 made some important discovery.
 Jealous type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the individual’s
 delusion is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful.
 Persecutory type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
 involves the individual’s belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated,
 spied on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or
 obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals.
 Somatic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
 involves bodily functions or sensations.
 Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
 Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief
 cannot be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g.,
 referential delusions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).
 Specify if:
 With bizarre content: Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly
 implausible, not understandable, and not derived from ordinary life experiences
 (e.g., an individual’s belief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs
 and replaced them with someone else’s organs without leaving any wounds or
 scars).
 Specify if:
 The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the
 disorder:
 First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder
 meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a
 time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
 First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period
 during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in
 which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
 First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time
 after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are
 present.
 Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode
 Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
 Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
 Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder
 are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom
 periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
 Unspecified
Specify current severity:
 Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
 psychomotor
 106
 behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its
 current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from
 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
 Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity
 specifier.
 Subtypes
 In erotomanic type, the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with the
 individual. The person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status (e.g., a
 famous individual or a superior at work) but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to contact the
 object of the delusion are common. In grandiose type, the central theme of the delusion is the
 conviction of having some great talent or insight or of having made some important discovery.
 Less commonly, the individual may have the delusion of having a special relationship with a
 prominent individual or of being a prominent person (in which case the actual individual may be
 regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may have a religious content. In jealous type, the
 central theme of the delusion is that of an unfaithful partner. This belief is arrived at without due
 cause and is based on incorrect inferences supported by small bits of “evidence” (e.g., disarrayed
 clothing). The individual with the delusion usually confronts the spouse or lover and attempts to
 intervene in the imagined infidelity. In persecutory type, the central theme of the delusion
 involves the individual’s belief of being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed,
 poisoned, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small
 slights may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. The affected individual
 may engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction by legal or legislative action. Individuals
 with persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to violence against those
 they believe are hurting them. In somatic type, the central theme of the delusion involves bodily
 functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can occur in several forms. Most common is the belief
 that the individual emits a foul odor; that there is an infestation of insects on or in the skin; that
 there is an internal parasite; or that parts of the body are not functioning.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of delusional disorder is the presence of one or more delusions that persist
 for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of delusional disorder is not given if the
 individual has ever had a symptom presentation that met Criterion A for schizophrenia (Criterion
 B). Apart from the direct impact of the delusions, impairments in psychosocial functioning may
 be more circumscribed than those seen in other psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia, and
 behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd (Criterion C). If mood episodes occur concurrently with
the delusions, the total duration of these mood episodes is brief relative to the total duration of
 the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions are not attributable to the physiological
 effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) and
 are not better explained by another mental disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or
 obsessive-compulsive disorder (Criterion E).
 In addition to the delusions identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assessment of cognition,
 depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically important distinctions
 between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders. Whereas delusions
 are a sine qua non of delusional disorder, hallucinations and negative symptoms are uncommon
 and disorganization is rare. By definition, the presence of catatonia in conjunction with delusions
 rules out delusional disorder, because Criterion A for schizophrenia would be met. A subset of
 cases has prominent depressive symptoms, but cognitive impairment and mania are rarely
 demonstrated.
 107
 Associated Features
 Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of delusional disorder.
 Individuals with delusional disorder may be able to factually describe that others view their
 beliefs as irrational but are unable to accept this themselves (i.e., there may be “factual insight”
 but no true insight). Many individuals develop irritable or dysphoric mood, which can sometimes
 be understood as a reaction to their delusional beliefs. Anger and violent behavior can occur with
 persecutory, jealous, and erotomanic types. The individual may engage in litigious or
 antagonistic behavior (e.g., sending hundreds of letters of protest to the government). Legal
 difficulties can occur, particularly in jealous and erotomanic types.
 Prevalence
 The lifetime prevalence of delusional disorder has been estimated at around 0.2% in a Finnish
 sample, and the most frequent subtype is persecutory. Delusional disorder, jealous type, is
 probably more common in men than in women, but there are no major sex or gender differences
 in the overall frequency of delusional disorder or in the content of the delusions.
 Development and Course
 On average, global functioning is generally better than that observed in schizophrenia. Although
 the diagnosis is generally stable, a proportion of individuals go on to develop schizophrenia.
 Whereas about a third of individuals with delusional disorder of 1–3 months’ duration
 subsequently receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia, the diagnosis of delusional disorder is much
 less likely to change if the duration of the disorder is greater than 6–12 months. Although
 delusional disorder can occur in younger age groups, it may be more prevalent in older
 individuals.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Delusional disorder has a significant familial relationship with both
 schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 An individual’s cultural and religious background must be taken into account in evaluating the
 possible presence of delusional disorder; in fact, some traditional beliefs unfamiliar to Western
 cultures may be wrongly labeled as delusional, so their context must be carefully assessed. The
 nature and content of delusions also vary among different cultural groups.
 Functional Consequences of Delusional Disorder
 The functional impairment is usually more circumscribed than that seen with other psychotic
 disorders, although in some cases, the impairment may be substantial and include poor
 occupational functioning and social isolation. When poor psychosocial functioning is present,
 delusional beliefs themselves often play a significant role. A common characteristic of
 individuals with delusional disorder is the apparent normality of their behavior and appearance
 when their delusional ideas are not being discussed or acted on. Men with delusional disorder
 generally have more severe symptoms and worse functional outcomes compared with women.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
 If an individual with obsessive-compulsive disorder is
 completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true, then the
 diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delusional
 108
 beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder. Similarly, if an
 individual with body dysmorphic disorder is completely convinced that his or her body
 dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder, with
 absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional
 disorder.
 Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and psychotic disorder due to another medical
 condition.
 Individuals with these disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder.
 For example, simple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder
 would be diagnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced 
psychotic
 disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptomatology to delusional disorder but can be
 distinguished by the chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the
 delusional beliefs.
 Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder.
 Delusional disorder can be distinguished from
 schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other characteristic
 symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia. Furthermore, the quality of delusions can help
 distinguish between schizophrenia and delusional disorder. In schizophrenia, delusions show
 greater disorganization (the degree to which delusions are internally consistent, logical, and
 systematized), whereas in delusional disorder, they show greater conviction (the degree to which
 the individual is convinced of the reality of the delusion), greater extension (the degree to which
 the delusion involves various areas of the individual’s life), and greater pressure (the degree to
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder.
 F23
 which the individual is preoccupied and concerned with the expressed delusion).
 These disorders may be distinguished
 from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the
 delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions occur exclusively during mood
 episodes, the diagnosis is major depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. Mood
 symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be superimposed on delusional disorder.
 Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration of all mood episodes remains
 brief relative to the total duration of the delusional disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other
 specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by
 other specified depressive disorder, unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and
 related disorder, or unspecified bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.