 Schizophreniform Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time
 during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these
 must be (1), (2), or (3):
 1. Delusions.
 2. Hallucinations.
 3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
 5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
 B. An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When
 the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified
 as “provisional.”
 C. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
 features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic
 episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if
 mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been
present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of
 the illness.
 D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
 Specify if:
 With good prognostic features: This specifier requires the presence of at least
 two of the following features: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4
 weeks of the first noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning; confusion
 or perplexity; good premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence
 of blunted or flat affect.
 Without good prognostic features: This specifier is applied if two or more of
 the above features have not been present.
 Specify if:
 With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
 disorder, p. 135, for definition).
 112
 Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with
 schizophreniform disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
 Specify current severity:
 Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
 psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
 be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
 scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
 Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder can be made without using this
 severity specifier.
 Note: For additional information on Associated Features, Development and Course
 (age-related factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, Sex- and Gender-Related
 Diagnostic Issues, Differential Diagnosis, and Comorbidity, see the corresponding
 sections in Schizophrenia.
 Diagnostic Features
 The characteristic symptoms of schizophreniform disorder are identical to those of schizophrenia
 (Criterion A). Schizophreniform disorder is distinguished by its difference in duration: the total
 duration of the illness, including prodromal, active, and residual phases, is at least 1 month but
 less than 6 months (Criterion B). The duration requirement for schizophreniform disorder is
 intermediate between that for brief psychotic disorder, which lasts more than 1 day and remits by
 1 month, and schizophrenia, which lasts for at least 6 months. The diagnosis of schizophreniform
disorder is made under two conditions: 1) when an episode of illness lasts between 1 and 6
 months and the individual has already recovered, and 2) when an individual is symptomatic for
 less than the 6 months’ duration required for the diagnosis of schizophrenia but has not yet
 recovered. In this case, the diagnosis should be noted as “schizophreniform disorder
 (provisional)” because it is uncertain if the individual will recover from the disturbance within
 the 6-month period. If the disturbance persists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis should be changed
 to schizophrenia.
 Another distinguishing feature of schizophreniform disorder is the lack of a criterion
 requiring impaired social and occupational functioning. While such impairments may potentially
 be present, they are not necessary for a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder.
 In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
 assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
 important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Associated Features
 As with schizophrenia, currently there are no laboratory or psychometric tests for
 schizophreniform disorder. There are multiple brain regions where neuroimaging,
 neuropathological, and neurophysiological research has indicated abnormalities, but none are
 diagnostic.
 Prevalence
 Incidence of schizophreniform disorder across sociocultural settings is likely similar to that
 observed in schizophrenia. In the United States and other high-income countries, the incidence is
 low, possibly fivefold less than that of schizophrenia. In lower-income countries, the incidence
 may be higher, especially for the specifier “with good prognostic features”; in some of these
 settings schizophreniform disorder may be as common as schizophrenia.
 113
 Development and Course
 The development of schizophreniform disorder is similar to that of schizophrenia. About one
third of individuals with an initial diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder (provisional) recover
 within the 6-month period and schizophreniform disorder is their final diagnosis. The majority of
 the remaining two-thirds of individuals will eventually receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia or
 schizoaffective disorder.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Relatives of individuals with schizophreniform disorder have an
 increased risk for schizophrenia.
 Functional Consequences of Schizophreniform Disorder
 For the majority of individuals with schizophreniform disorder who eventually receive a
 diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the functional consequences are similar to
 the consequences of those disorders. Most individuals experience dysfunction in several areas of
Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 Brief psychotic disorder.
 F20.9
 daily functioning, such as school or work, interpersonal relationships, and self-care. Individuals
 who recover from schizophreniform disorder have better functional outcomes.
 Differential Diagnosis
 A wide variety of mental disorders and medical
 conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms that must be considered in the differential
 diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. These include psychotic disorder due to another medical
 condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder; substance/medication
induced psychotic disorder or delirium; major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
 features; schizoaffective disorder; other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder;
 major depressive or bipolar disorder with catatonic features; schizophrenia; delusional disorder;
 other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder; schizotypal,
 schizoid, or paranoid personality disorders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in
 childhood with disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; obsessive
compulsive disorder; posttraumatic stress disorder; and traumatic brain injury.
 Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ primarily
 in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophrenia also applies to
 schizophreniform disorder.
 Schizophreniform disorder differs in duration from brief psychotic
 disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month