 Catatonia Associated With Another Mental Disorder
 (Catatonia Specifier)
 F06.1
 A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
 1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
 2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
 3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
 4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [exclude if known aphasia]).
 5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
 6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against
 gravity).
 7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
 8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed
 movements).
 9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
 10. Grimacing.
 11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
 12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
 Coding note: Indicate the name of the associated mental disorder when recording
 the name of the condition (i.e., F06.1 catatonia associated with major depressive
 disorder). Code first the associated mental disorder (e.g., neurodevelopmental
 disorder, brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia,
 schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, or other mental
 disorder) (e.g., F25.1 schizoaffective disorder, depressive type; F06.1 catatonia
 associated with schizoaffective disorder).
 136
 Diagnostic Features
 Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier) may be used when criteria
 are met for catatonia during the course of a neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive,
 or other mental disorder. The catatonia specifier is appropriate when the clinical picture is
 characterized by marked psychomotor disturbance and involves at least three of the 12 diagnostic
F06.1
 features listed in Criterion A. Catatonia is typically diagnosed in an inpatient setting and occurs
 in up to 35% of individuals with schizophrenia, but the majority of catatonia cases involve
 individuals with depressive or bipolar disorders. Meta-analysis of clinical samples indicated that
 approximately 9% of patients had catatonia. Before the catatonia specifier is used in
 neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive, or other mental disorders, a wide variety of
 other medical conditions need to be ruled out; these conditions include, but are not limited to,
 medical conditions due to infectious, metabolic, or neurological conditions (see “Catatonic
 Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition”). Catatonia can also be a side effect of a
 medication (see the chapter “Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse
 Effects of Medication”). Because of the seriousness of the complications, particular attention
 should be paid to the possibility that the catatonia is attributable to G21.0 neuroleptic malignant
 syndrome.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The association between catatonia and mood disorders has been found in a wide range of cultural
 contexts.