Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
 medical condition.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Specify whether:
 Code based on predominant symptom:
 F06.2 With delusions: If delusions are the predominant symptom.
 F06.0 With hallucinations: If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
 Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
 mental disorder (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with
 delusions). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately
 immediately before the psychotic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., C34.90
 malignant lung neoplasm; F06.2 psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm,
 with delusions).
 Specify current severity:
 Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
 and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
 severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not
 present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
 Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition can be
 made without using this severity specifier.
 Specifiers
 In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assessment of
 cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically important
 distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are prominent
 delusions or hallucinations that are judged to be attributable to the physiological effects of
 another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the
 symptoms are not a psychologically mediated response to a severe medical condition, in which
 case a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder, with marked stressor, would be appropriate).
 132
 Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality (i.e., visual, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, or
 auditory), but certain etiological factors are likely to evoke specific hallucinatory phenomena.
 Olfactory hallucinations are suggestive of temporal lobe epilepsy, for example. Hallucinations
 may vary from simple and unformed to highly complex and organized, depending on etiological
 and environmental factors. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is generally not
 diagnosed if the individual maintains reality testing for the hallucinations and appreciates that
 they result from the medical condition. Delusions may have a variety of themes, including
 somatic, grandiose, religious, and, most commonly, persecutory. On the whole, however,
 associations between delusions and particular medical conditions appear to be less specific than
 is the case for hallucinations.
 Although there are no infallible guidelines to determine whether the psychotic disturbance is
 etiologically attributable to another medical condition, three considerations can provide some
 guidance: biological plausibility, temporality, and typicality. First, the presence of a medical
 condition that has the potential to cause psychotic symptoms through a putative physiological
 mechanism (e.g., severe, generalized infection; porphyria; lupus; temporal lobe epilepsy) must
 be identified (biological plausibility). The second consideration is whether there is a temporal
 association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the medical condition and that of the
 psychotic disturbance (temporality). The third consideration in favor of a medical etiology of the
 psychotic symptoms is the presence of features that would be atypical for an independent
 psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset, presence of visual or olfactory hallucinations)
 (typicality). Finally, causes of psychotic symptoms other than the physiological effects of a
 medical condition need to be considered and ruled out (e.g., substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder, psychotic symptoms occurring as side effects of the treatment of the medical
 condition).
 The temporal association of the onset or exacerbation of the medical condition offers the
 greatest diagnostic certainty that the delusions or hallucinations are attributable to a medical
 condition. Additional factors may include concomitant treatments for the underlying medical
 condition that confer a risk for psychosis independently, such as steroid treatment for
 autoimmune disorders.
 The diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition depends on the clinical
 condition of each individual, and the diagnostic tests will vary according to that condition. A
 wide variety of medical conditions may cause psychotic symptoms. These include neurological
 conditions (e.g., neoplasms, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
 multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, auditory or visual nerve injury or impairment, deafness, migraine,
 central nervous system infections), endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypothyroidism,
hyper- and hypoparathyroidism, hyper- and hypoadrenocorticism), metabolic conditions (e.g.,
 hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia), vitamin B12 deficiency, fluid or electrolyte imbalances,
 hepatic or renal diseases, and autoimmune disorders with central nervous system involvement
 (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, N-methyl-D-aspartate [NMDA] receptor autoimmune
 encephalitis). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of
 prevalence or onset reflect the etiological medical condition.
 Prevalence
 Prevalence rates for psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are difficult to estimate
 given the wide variety of underlying medical etiologies. Lifetime prevalence has been estimated
 to range from 0.21% to 0.54% in studies in Sweden and Finland. When the prevalence findings
 are stratified by age group, individuals older than 65 years have a significantly greater prevalence
 of 0.74% compared with those in younger age groups in Finland. Rates of psychosis also vary
 according to the underlying medical condition; conditions most commonly associated with
 psychosis include untreated endocrine and metabolic disorders, autoimmune disorders (e.g.,
 systemic lupus erythematosus, NMDA receptor autoimmune encephalitis), or temporal lobe
 epilepsy. Psychosis attributable to epilepsy
 133
 has been further differentiated into ictal, postictal, and interictal psychosis. The most common of
 these is postictal psychosis, observed in 2%–7.8% of individuals with epilepsy. Among older
 individuals, there may be a higher prevalence of the disorder in women, although additional sex
or gender-related features are not clear and vary considerably with the sex and gender
 distributions of the underlying medical conditions. An estimated 60% of older individuals with
 new-onset psychosis have a medical etiology for their psychotic symptoms.
 Development and Course
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition may be a single transient state or it may be
 recurrent, cycling with exacerbations and remissions of the underlying medical condition.
 Although treatment of the underlying medical condition often results in a resolution of the
 psychosis, this is not always the case, and psychotic symptoms may persist long after the medical
 event (e.g., psychotic disorder due to focal brain injury). In the context of chronic conditions
 such as multiple sclerosis or chronic interictal psychosis of epilepsy, the psychosis may assume a
 long-term course.
 The expression of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition does not differ
 substantially in phenomenology depending on age at occurrence. However, older age groups
 have a higher prevalence of the disorder, which is most likely due to the increasing medical
 burden associated with advanced age and the cumulative effects of deleterious exposures and
 age-related processes (e.g., atherosclerosis). The nature of the underlying medical conditions is
 likely to change across the lifespan, with younger age groups more affected by epilepsy, head
 trauma, autoimmune, and neoplastic diseases of early to midlife, and older age groups more
 affected by a neurodegenerative disease (e.g., Alzheimer’s), stroke disease, anoxic events, and
 multiple system comorbidities. Underlying factors with increasing age, such as preexisting
 cognitive impairment as well as vision and hearing impairments, may incur a greater risk for
psychosis, possibly by serving to lower the threshold for experiencing psychosis.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Course modifiers.
 Identification and treatment of the underlying medical condition has the
 greatest impact on course, although preexisting central nervous system injury may confer a
 worse course outcome (e.g., head trauma, cerebrovascular disease).
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Suicide risk in the context of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is not clearly
 delineated, although certain conditions such as epilepsy and multiple sclerosis are associated
 with increased rates of suicide, which may be further increased in the presence of psychosis.
 Functional Consequences of Psychotic Disorder Due to Another
 Medical Condition
 Functional disability is typically severe in the context of psychotic disorder due to another
 medical condition but will vary considerably by the type of condition and likely improve with
 successful resolution of the condition.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in
 the context of a delirium; a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to
 134
 another medical condition is not given if the delusions and/or hallucinations occur exclusively
 during the course of a delirium. On the other hand, a diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to
 another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild
 neurocognitive disorder if the delusions or hallucinations are judged to be a physiological
 consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder (e.g., psychotic
 disorder due to Lewy body disease, with delusions).
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 If there is evidence of recent or prolonged
 substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance or
 medication that can cause psychotic symptoms on withdrawal, or exposure to a toxin (e.g., LSD
 [lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxication, alcohol withdrawal), a substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder should be considered. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within
 4 weeks) of substance intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially
 indicative of a substance-induced psychotic disorder, depending on the character, duration, or
 amount of the substance used. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a
 medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another
 medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be given.
 Psychotic disorder.
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distinguished
 from a psychotic disorder that is not due to another medical condition (e.g., schizophrenia,
 delusional disorder, schizoaffective disorder) or a major depressive or bipolar disorder, with
 psychotic features. In psychotic disorders and in depressive or bipolar disorders, with psychotic
features, no specific and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical
 condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history
 of schizophrenia or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the
 diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that
 involve voices speaking complex sentences are more characteristic of schizophrenia than of
 psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. While certain symptoms suggest a medical or
 toxic etiology (e.g., visual or olfactory hallucinations, dreamlike quality of delusions [individual
 as uninvolved observer]), there are no pathognomonic signs or symptoms that unequivocally
 point clinicians either way. Visual hallucinations are not uncommon in schizophrenia or bipolar
 disorder, and olfactory hallucinations (e.g., unpleasant smells) are also consistent with a
 diagnosis of schizophrenia. Thus, clinicians should not give undue weight to any one particular
 hallucination alone when deciding between a psychiatric and a medical cause for
 psychopathology.
 Comorbidity
 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition in individuals older than 80 years is
 associated with concurrent major neurocognitive disorder (dementia). Alzheimer’s disease is
 commonly accompanied by psychosis, and psychosis is a defining feature in Lewy body disease.