Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
 1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
 2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
 3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
 4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [Note: not applicable if there is
 an established aphasia]).
 5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
 6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against
 gravity).
 7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
 8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed
 movements).
 9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
 10. Grimacing.
 11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
 12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
 medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., a manic
 episode).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 137
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Coding note: Include the name of the medical condition in the name of the mental
 disorder (e.g., F06.1 catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
 medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the
 catatonic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., K72.90 hepatic
 encephalopathy; F06.1 catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is the presence of
 catatonia that is judged to be attributed to the physiological effects of another medical condition.
 Catatonia can be diagnosed by the presence of at least 3 of the 12 clinical features in Criterion A.
 There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
 catatonia is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). The diagnosis is not given if
 the catatonia is better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., manic episode) (Criterion C) or
 if it occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion D).
 Associated Features
 A variety of medical conditions may cause catatonia, especially neurological conditions (e.g.,
 neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease, encephalitis) and metabolic conditions (e.g.,
 hypercalcemia, hepatic encephalopathy, homocystinuria, diabetic ketoacidosis). The associated
 physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence and onset reflect
 those of the etiological medical condition.
 Differential Diagnosis
 A separate diagnosis of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is not given if the
 catatonia occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium or neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
 However, even though a separate diagnosis of catatonia cannot be made, research suggests that
 catatonia symptoms occur in a significant proportion of delirium cases. If the individual is
 currently taking neuroleptic medication, consideration should be given to medication-induced
 movement disorders (e.g., abnormal positioning may be due to neuroleptic-induced acute
 dystonia) or neuroleptic malignant syndrome (e.g., catatonic-like features may be present, along
 with associated vital sign and/or laboratory abnormalities). Catatonic symptoms may be present
 in any of the following five psychotic disorders: brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform
 disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and substance/medication-induced psychotic
 disorder. It may also be present in some of the neurodevelopmental disorders, in all of the bipolar
 and depressive disorders, and in other mental disorders.
