Schizophrenia
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time
 during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these
 must be (1), (2), or (3):
 1. Delusions.
 2. Hallucinations.
 3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
 114
 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
 5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
 B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of
 functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or
 self-care, is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the
 onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of
 interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month
 period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated)
 that meet Criterion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of
 prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the
 signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or by
 two or more symptoms listed in Criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g.,
 odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
 D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
 features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic
 episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if
 mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been
 present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of
 the illness.
 E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
 (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
 F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of
 childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if
 prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms
 of schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully
 treated).
 Specify if:
 The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the
 disorder and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
 First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder
 meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a
 time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
 First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a period of
 time during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in
 which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
 First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time
 after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are
 present.
 Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be
 determined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a
 remission and a minimum of one relapse).
 Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
 Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
 Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder
 are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom
 periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
 Unspecified
Specify if:
 With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
 disorder, p. 135, for definition).
 Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with
 schizophrenia to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
 115
 Specify current severity:
 Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
 psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
 be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
 scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
 Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of schizophrenia can be made without using this severity
 specifier.
 Diagnostic Features
 The characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia involve a range of cognitive, behavioral, and
 emotional dysfunctions, but no single symptom is pathognomonic of the disorder. The diagnosis
 involves the recognition of a constellation of signs and symptoms associated with impaired
 occupational or social functioning. Individuals with the disorder will vary substantially on most
 features, as schizophrenia is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome.
 At least two Criterion A symptoms must be present for a significant portion of time during a
 1-month period or longer. At least one of these symptoms must be the clear presence of
 delusions (Criterion A1), hallucinations (Criterion A2), or disorganized speech (Criterion A3).
 Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior (Criterion A4) and negative symptoms (Criterion A5)
 may also be present. In those situations in which the active-phase symptoms remit within a
 month in response to treatment, Criterion A is still met if the clinician estimates that they would
 have persisted in the absence of treatment.
 Schizophrenia involves impairment in one or more major areas of functioning (Criterion B).
 If the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of function is not
 attained. Comparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful. The dysfunction
 persists for a substantial period during the course of the disorder and does not appear to be a
 direct result of any single feature. Avolition (i.e., reduced drive to pursue goal-directed behavior;
 Criterion A5) is linked to the social dysfunction described under Criterion B. There is also strong
 evidence for a relationship between cognitive impairment (see the section “Associated Features”
 for this disorder) and functional impairment in individuals with schizophrenia.
 Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least 6 months
 (Criterion C). Prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may
 follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions. Individuals
may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that are not of delusional proportions (e.g., ideas
 of reference or magical thinking); they may have unusual perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing
 the presence of an unseen person); their speech may be generally understandable but vague; and
 their behavior may be unusual but not grossly disorganized (e.g., mumbling in public). Negative
 symptoms are common in the prodromal and residual phases and can be severe. Individuals who
 had been socially active may become withdrawn from previous routines. Such behaviors are
 often the first sign of a disorder.
 Mood symptoms and full mood episodes are common in schizophrenia and may be
 concurrent with active-phase symptomatology. However, as distinct from a psychotic mood
 disorder, a schizophrenia diagnosis requires the presence of delusions or hallucinations in the
 absence of mood episodes. In addition, mood episodes, taken in total, should be present for only
 a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
 In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
 assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
 important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 116
 Associated Features
 Individuals with schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., laughing in the absence of
 an appropriate stimulus); a dysphoric mood that can take the form of depression, anxiety, or
 anger; a disturbed sleep pattern (e.g., daytime sleeping and nighttime activity); and a lack of
 interest in eating or food refusal. Depersonalization, derealization, and somatic concerns may
 occur and sometimes reach delusional proportions. Anxiety and phobias are common. Cognitive
 deficits in schizophrenia are common and are strongly linked to vocational and functional
 impairments. These deficits can include decrements in declarative memory, working memory,
 language function, and other executive functions, as well as slower processing speed.
 Abnormalities in sensory processing and inhibitory capacity, as well as reductions in attention,
 are also found. Some individuals with schizophrenia show social cognition deficits, including
 deficits in the ability to infer the intentions of other people (theory of mind), and may attend to
 and then interpret irrelevant events or stimuli as meaningful, perhaps leading to the generation of
 explanatory delusions. These impairments frequently persist during symptomatic remission.
 Some individuals with psychosis may lack insight or awareness of their disorder (i.e.,
 anosognosia). This lack of “insight” includes unawareness of symptoms of schizophrenia and
 may be present throughout the entire course of the illness. Unawareness of illness is typically a
 symptom of schizophrenia itself rather than a coping strategy. It is comparable to the lack of
 awareness of neurological deficits following brain damage, termed anosognosia. This symptom
 is the most common predictor of nonadherence to treatment, and it predicts higher relapse rates,
 increased number of involuntary treatments, poorer psychosocial functioning, aggression, and a
 poorer course of illness.
 Hostility and aggression can be associated with schizophrenia, although spontaneous or
 random assault is uncommon. Aggression is more frequent for younger males and for individuals
 with a past history of violence, nonadherence to treatment, substance abuse, and impulsivity. It
 should be noted that the vast majority of persons with schizophrenia are not aggressive and are
more frequently victimized than are individuals in the general population.
 Currently, there are no radiological, laboratory, or psychometric tests for the disorder.
 Differences are evident in multiple brain regions between groups of healthy individuals and
 persons with schizophrenia, including evidence from neuroimaging, neuropathological, and
 neurophysiological studies. Differences are also evident in cellular architecture, white matter
 connectivity, and gray matter volume in a variety of regions such as the prefrontal and temporal
 cortices. Reduced overall brain volume has been observed, as well as increased brain volume
 reduction with age. Brain volume reductions with age are more pronounced in individuals with
 schizophrenia than in healthy individuals. Finally, individuals with schizophrenia appear to differ
 from individuals without the disorder in eye-tracking and electrophysiological indices.
 Neurological soft signs common in individuals with schizophrenia include impairments in
 motor coordination, sensory integration, and motor sequencing of complex movements; left-right
 confusion; and disinhibition of associated movements. In addition, minor physical anomalies of
 the face and limbs may occur.
 Prevalence
 The estimated lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is approximately 0.3%–0.7%, with variation
 over a fivefold range in meta-analyses of nationally representative surveys. Studies have shown
 increased prevalence and incidence of schizophrenia for some groups based on migration and
 refugee status, urbanicity, and the economic status and latitude of the country. It is important to
 note that the reported prevalence and incidence of schizophrenia may be affected by the fact that
 some groups are more likely to be misdiagnosed or overdiagnosed.
 117
 The sex ratio differs across samples and populations: for example, presentations with
 prominent negative symptoms and longer duration of disorder (associated with poorer outcome)
 show higher incidence rates for men, whereas definitions allowing for the inclusion of more
 mood symptoms and brief presentations (associated with better outcome) show equivalent risks
 for both sexes. A large worldwide study, which was based on a range of definitions of
 schizophrenia, found no difference in prevalence between the sexes.
 Development and Course
 The requisite psychotic features of the schizophrenia diagnosis typically emerge between the late
 teens and the mid-30s; onset prior to adolescence is rare. The peak onset age occurs in the early
to mid-20s for men and in the late-20s for women. The onset may be abrupt or insidious, but the
 majority of individuals manifest a slow and gradual development of a variety of clinically
 significant signs and symptoms, particularly social withdrawal, emo-tional changes, and
 cognitive changes producing a deterioration in role functioning. Half of these individuals display
 depressive symptoms. Prognosis is influenced both by dura-tion and by severity of illness and
 gender. Men, especially those with long duration of psychosis before treatment and lower
 premorbid adjustment, have more prominent negative symptoms, cognitive impairment, and
 generally worse functional outcomes than women. Sociocognitive deficits may manifest during
 development and precede the emergence of psychosis, taking the form of stable impairments
 during adulthood, refractory to antipsychotic medications.
Course and outcome in schizophrenia are heterogeneous, and prognosis is uncertain at the
 onset of psychosis. Although most individuals with schizophrenia remain vulnerable to
 exacerbation of psychotic symptoms and a chronic course defined by symptoms and functional
 impairment is common, many individuals experience periods of remission and even recovery.
 According to a meta-analysis of 79 longitudinal studies of first-episode psychosis with more than
 1 year of follow-up, the pooled remission rate (qualitatively defined as mild or absent symptoms
 for at least 6 months) for first-episode schizophrenia was 56% and the pooled recovery rate
 (qualitatively defined as symptomatic and functional improvement for greater than 2 years) was
 30%. A different meta-analysis of 50 studies of individuals with broadly defined schizophrenia
 (i.e., schizophrenia, schizophreniform, schizoaffective, or delusional disorder) found that the
 median proportion of individuals who met recovery criteria (at most mild symptoms and
 improvements in social and/or occupational functioning persisting for at least 2 years) was
 13.5%. There is a tendency for reduced psychotic experiences during late life. In addition to
 psychosis, cognitive impairment and negative symptom pathology are core features of
 schizophrenia, and the course for these characteristic features is different from that of positive
 psychotic symptoms. Cognition tends to decline during development prior to full psychosis and
 is relatively stable over the longer term. Negative symptoms, if present during development, also
 tend to be relatively stable traits over time. Negative symptoms that begin after psychosis onset
 are more variable and may reflect secondary causes. A degree of chronicity is required for a
 diagnosis of schizophrenia, and long-term course reflects a need for mental health care and living
 support in many individuals. While schizophrenia is generally not a progressive
 neurodegenerative disorder, life challenges, changing lifestyle, and persistent symptoms may
 lead to progressive dysfunction in more severe chronic cases.
 The essential features of schizophrenia are the same in childhood, but it is more difficult to
 make the diagnosis. In children, delusions and hallucinations may be less elaborate than in
 adults, and visual hallucinations are more common and should be distinguished from normal
 fantasy play. Disorganized speech occurs in many disorders with childhood onset (e.g., autism
 spectrum disorder), as does disorganized behavior (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
 These symptoms should not be attributed to schizophrenia
 118
 without due consideration of the more common disorders of childhood. Childhood-onset
 cases tend to resemble poor-outcome adult cases, with gradual onset and prominent negative
 symptoms. Children who later receive the diagnosis of schizophrenia are more likely to have
 experienced nonspecific emotional-behavioral disturbances and psychopathology, intellectual
 and language alterations, and subtle motor delays.
 Late-onset cases (i.e., onset after age 40 years) are overrepresented by women, who may
 have married. Often, the course is characterized by a predominance of psychotic symptoms with
 preservation of affect and social functioning. Such late-onset cases can still meet the diagnostic
 criteria for schizophrenia, but it is not yet clear whether this is the same condition as
 schizophrenia diagnosed prior to midlife (e.g., prior to age 55 years).
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Season of birth has been linked to the incidence of schizophrenia, including late
winter/early spring in some locations and summer for the deficit form of the disease. The
 incidence of schizophrenia and related disorders may be higher for children growing up in an
 urban environment, for refugees, for some migrant groups, and for socially oppressed groups
 facing discrimination. There is evidence that social deprivation, social adversity, and
 socioeconomic factors may be associated with increased rates of this disorder. Among
 individuals with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, the severity of positive and
 negative symptoms appears to be correlated with the severity of adverse childhood experiences,
 such as trauma and neglect. Higher rates of schizophrenia for some ethnic and racialized groups
 have been documented when they live in areas with lower proportions of people from the same
 ethnicity or racialized group. The reasons for this are not completely clear but appear related to
 several factors, including the following: 1) higher levels of discrimination or fear of
 discrimination; 2) less social support and more stigmatization of those with schizophrenia; 3)
 higher social isolation; and 4) decreased availability of and access to normalizing explanations of
 perceptual experiences and abnormal beliefs reported by individuals at high risk for developing
 schizophrenia.
 Genetic and physiological.
 There is a strong contribution for genetic factors in determining risk for
 schizophrenia, although most individuals who have been diagnosed with schizophrenia have no
 family history of psychosis. Liability is conferred by a spectrum of risk alleles, common and
 rare, with each allele contributing only a small fraction to the total population variance. The risk
 alleles identified to date are also associated with other mental disorders, including bipolar
 disorder, depression, and autism spectrum disorder.
 Pregnancy and birth complications with hypoxia and greater paternal age are associated with
 a higher risk of schizophrenia for the developing fetus. In addition, other prenatal and perinatal
 adversities, including stress, infection, malnutrition, maternal diabetes, and other medical
 conditions, have been linked with schizophrenia. However, the vast majority of offspring with
 these risk factors do not develop schizophrenia.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The form and content of schizophrenia symptoms can vary cross-culturally, including the
 following ways: the relative proportion of visual and auditory hallucinations (e.g., while auditory
 hallucinations tend to be more common than visual hallucinations around the world, the relative
 proportion of visual hallucinations may be particularly higher in some regions compared with
 others); the specific content of the delusions (e.g., persecutory, grandiose, somatic) and
 hallucinations (e.g., command, abusive, religious); and the level of fear associated with them.
 Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual and the
 clinician do not share the same cultural and socioeconomic background. Ideas that appear to be
 delusional in one cultural context (e.g., evil eye, causing illness through curses, influences of
 spirits) may be commonly held in others.
 119
 In some cultural contexts, visual or auditory hallucinations with a religious content (e.g., hearing
 God’s voice) are a normal part of religious experience. In addition, the assessment of
 disorganized speech may be made difficult by linguistic variation in narrative styles across
 cultures. The assessment of affect requires sensitivity to differences in styles of emotional
expression, eye contact, and body language, which vary across cultures. If the assessment is
 conducted in a language that is different from the individual’s primary language, care must be
 taken to ensure that alogia is not related to linguistic barriers. In certain cultures, distress may
 take the form of hallucinations or pseudo-hallucinations and overvalued ideas that may present
 clinically similar to true psychosis but are normative to the individual’s subgroup. Misdiagnosis
 of schizophrenia in individuals with mood disorders with psychotic features or with other
 psychiatric disorders is more likely to occur in members of underserved ethnic and racialized
 groups (in the United States, especially among African Americans). This may be attributable to
 clinical bias, racism, or discrimination leading to limited quality of information and potential
 misinterpretation of symptoms.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 A number of features distinguish the clinical expression of schizophrenia in women and men.
 The age at onset is later in women, with a second midlife peak. Symptoms tend to be more
 affect-laden among women, and there are more psychotic symptoms, as well as a greater
 propensity for psychotic symptoms to worsen in later life. Other symptom differences include
 less frequent negative symptoms and disorganization. Finally, social functioning tends to remain
 better preserved in women. There are, however, frequent exceptions to these general caveats.
 Psychotic symptoms have been observed to worsen during the premenstrual time period
 when estrogen levels are dropping; consequently, increased psychiatric admission rates are seen
 in women with schizophrenia just before and during menses. Lower estrogen levels resulting
 from menopause may be another factor associated with the second peak of onset in women in
 midlife. Similarly, psychotic symptoms appear to improve during pregnancy when estrogen
 levels are high and worsen again postpartum when estrogen levels precipitously drop.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Approximately 5%–6% of individuals with schizophrenia die by suicide, about 20% attempt
 suicide on one or more occasions, and many more have significant suicidal ideation. Suicidal
 behavior is sometimes in response to command hallucinations to harm oneself or others. Suicide
 risk remains high over the whole lifespan for men and women, although it may be especially
 high for younger men with comorbid substance use. Other risk factors include depressive
 symptoms, hopelessness, being unemployed, the period after a psychotic episode or hospital
 discharge, number of psychiatric admissions, closeness to onset of illness, and older age at
 illness onset. A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies found that the odds
 of suicidal behavior during follow-up after first-episode psychosis were higher among
 individuals with depressive symptoms during first-episode psychosis compared with those
 without. A meta-analysis of a large number of studies of the relationship of schizophrenia with
 suicidal behavior found that alcohol, tobacco, and drug abuse; depression; number of
 hospitalizations; physical comorbidity; and family history of depression and suicidal behavior
 increased the risk of suicide attempt. Risk factors for suicide included male sex, being younger,
 having a higher IQ, history of attempts, hopelessness, and poor adherence to treatment.
 Functional Consequences of Schizophrenia
 Schizophrenia is associated with significant social and occupational dysfunction. Among
individuals with schizophrenia, deficits in reading ability are more severe than what would
 120
 be predicted by the general cognitive impairments associated with the disorder. Such deficits can
 be conceptualized as a secondary or acquired dyslexia that underlies the academic impairment
 observed in schizophrenia. Making educational progress and maintaining employment are
 frequently impaired by avolition or other disorder manifestations, even when the cognitive skills
 are sufficient for the tasks at hand. Most individuals are employed at a lower level than their
 parents, and most, particularly men, do not marry or have limited social contacts outside of their
 family.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features.
 The distinction between
 schizophrenia and major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features or with catatonia
 depends on the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the psychosis, and on
 the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If delusions or hallucinations occur
 exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode, the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar
 disorder with psychotic features.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major depressive
 or manic episode occur concurrently with the active-phase symptoms and that the mood
 symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
 Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder.
 These disorders are of shorter duration than
 schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symptoms. In
 schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in brief psychotic
 disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
 Delusional disorder.
 Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by the absence
 of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prominent auditory or
 visual hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, negative
 symptoms).
 Schizotypal personality disorder.
 Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished from
 schizophrenia by subthreshold symptoms that are associated with persistent personality features.
 Individuals 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder.
 with 
obsessive
compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder may present with poor or absent insight, and
 the preoccupations may reach delusional proportions. But these disorders are distinguished from
 schizophrenia by their prominent obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance or
 body odor, hoarding, or body-focused repetitive behaviors.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder may include flashbacks that have a
 hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilance may reach paranoid proportions. But a traumatic event
 and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event are required to
 make the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders.
 These disorders may also have symptoms
 resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective deficits in social
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
 interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and communication
 deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disorder or communication disorder must have
 symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent hallucinations or delusions
 for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophrenia as a comorbid condition.
 The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made
 only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the physiological effects of a
 substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a delirium or major or minor
 neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
 121
 but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent with
 those disorders.
 Individuals with substance/medication-induced
 psychotic disorder may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia,
 but the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the
 chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the psychosis in the
 absence of substance use.
 Comorbidity
 Rates of comorbidity with substance-related disorders are high in schizophrenia. Over half of
 individuals with schizophrenia have tobacco use disorder and smoke cigarettes regularly.
 Comorbidity with anxiety disorders is increasingly recognized in schizophrenia. Rates of
 obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder are elevated in individuals with schizophrenia
 compared with the general population. Schizotypal or paranoid personality disorder may
 sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
 Life expectancy is reduced in individuals with schizophrenia because of associated medical
 conditions. Weight gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular and pulmonary
 disease are more common in schizophrenia than in the general population. Poor engagement in
 health maintenance behaviors (e.g., cancer screening, exercise) increases the risk of chronic
 disease, but other disorder factors, including medications, lifestyle, cigarette smoking, and diet,
 may also play a role. A shared vulnerability for psychosis and medical conditions may explain
 some of the medical comorbidity of schizophrenia