Brief Psychotic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must
 be (1), (2), or (3):
 1. Delusions.
 2. Hallucinations.
 3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
 Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response.
 B. Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
 with eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
 109
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder
 with psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or
 catatonia, and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
 a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
 Specify if:
 With marked stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in
 response to events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to
 almost anyone in similar circumstances in the individual’s culture.
 Without marked stressor(s): If symptoms do not occur in response to events
 that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
 circumstances in the individual’s culture.
 With peripartum onset: If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks
postpartum.
 Specify if:
 With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
 disorder, p. 135, for definition).
 Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with brief
 psychotic disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
 Specify current severity:
 Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
 psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
 psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
 be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
 scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
 Measures.”)
 Note: Diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder can be made without using this
 severity specifier.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of brief psychotic disorder is a disturbance that involves at least one of the
 following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech (e.g.,
 frequent derailment or incoherence), or grossly abnormal psychomotor behavior, including
 catatonia (Criterion A). An episode of the disturbance lasts at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
 and the individual eventually has a full return to the premorbid level of functioning (Criterion B).
 The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
 features, by schizoaffective disorder, or by schizophrenia and is not attributable to the
 physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a hallucinogen) or another medical condition (e.g.,
 subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
 In addition to the four symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
 assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
 important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with brief psychotic disorder typically experience emotional turmoil or
 overwhelming confusion. They may have rapid shifts from one intense affect to another.
 Although the disturbance is brief, the level of impairment may be severe, and supervision may be
 required to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and that the individual is protected
 from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or acting on the basis of
 delusions. There appears to be an increased risk of suicidal behavior, particularly during the
 acute episode.
 110
 Prevalence
Brief psychotic disorder may account for 2%–7% of cases of first-onset psychosis in several
 countries.
 Development and Course
 Brief psychotic disorder may appear in adolescence or early adulthood, and onset can occur
 across the life span, with the average age at onset being the mid 30s. By definition, a diagnosis of
 brief psychotic disorder requires a full remission of all symptoms and an eventual full return to
 the premorbid level of functioning within 1 month of the onset of the disturbance. In some
 individuals, the duration of psychotic symptoms may be quite brief (e.g., a few days).
 Although brief psychotic disorder by definition reaches a full remission within 1 month,
 subsequently more than 50% of the individuals experience a relapse. Despite the possibility of
 relapse, for most individuals, outcome is favorable in terms of social functioning and
 symptomatology.
 In less than half of cases diagnosed with DSM-IV brief psychotic disorder or ICD-10 acute
 and transient psychotic disorder, the diagnosis changes—more often to schizophrenia spectrum
 disorders and less often to affective disorders or to other psychotic disorders.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 It is important to distinguish symptoms of brief psychotic disorder from culturally sanctioned
 response patterns. For example, in some religious ceremonies, an individual may report hearing
 voices, but these do not generally persist and are not perceived as abnormal by most members of
 the individual’s community. In a wide range of cultural contexts, it would be common or
 expected for bereaved relatives to hear, see, or interact with the spirit of a recently deceased
 loved one without notable pathological sequelae. In addition, cultural and religious background
 must be taken into account when considering whether beliefs are delusional.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other medical conditions.
 A variety of medical conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms
 of short duration. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or a delirium is diagnosed
 when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests that the
 delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological consequence of a specific medical
 condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, brain tumor) (see “Psychotic Disorder Due to Another
 Medical Condition” later in this chapter).
 Substance-related disorders.
 Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, substance-induced
 delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psychotic disorder by the fact
 that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin) is judged to be
 etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic
 Disorder” later in this chapter). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug screen or a blood alcohol
 level, may be helpful in making this determination, as may a careful history of substance use
 with attention to temporal relationships between substance intake and onset of the symptoms and
 to the nature of the substance being used.
 Depressive and bipolar disorders.
 The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be made if the
 psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic symptoms occur
 exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode).
Other psychotic disorders.
 Malingering and factitious disorders.
 Personality disorders.
 F20.81
 If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the diagnosis
 is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder with psychotic
 features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or
 111
 unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
 symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder and
 schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted before 1
 month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention should be given to
 the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute exacerbations of
 schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
 An episode of factitious disorder with predominantly
 psychological signs and symptoms may have the appearance of brief psychotic disorder, but in
 such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced. When malingering
 involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence that the illness is being
 feigned for an understandable goal.
 In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial stressors
 may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usually transient and
 do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at least 1 day, an
 additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.