Differential Diagnosis
 Illness anxiety disorder.
 Although individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder can
 present with vague somatic complaints as well as fears of permanent brain damage, the diagnosis
 of depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by the presence of a constellation of
 typical depersonalization/derealization symptoms and the absence of other manifestations of
 illness anxiety disorder.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Feelings of numbness, deadness, apathy, and being in a dream are not
 uncommon in major depressive episodes. However, in depersonalization/derealization disorder,
 such symptoms are associated with further symptoms of the disorder. If the
 depersonalization/derealization clearly precedes the onset of a major depressive episode or
 clearly continues after its resolution, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder
 applies.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 Some individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder
 can become obsessively preoccupied with their subjective experience or develop rituals checking
 on the status of their symptoms. However, other symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder
 unrelated to depersonalization/derealization are not present.
 Other dissociative disorders.
 In order to diagnose depersonalization/derealization disorder, the
 symptoms should not occur in the context of another dissociative disorder, such as dissociative
 identity disorder. Differentiation from dissociative amnesia and functional neurological symptom
 disorder (conversion disorder) is simpler, as the symptoms of these disorders do not overlap with
 those of depersonalization/derealization disorder.
 Panic attacks.
 increasingly 
Depersonalization/derealization is one of the symptoms of panic attacks,
 common 
as 
panic 
attack 
severity 
increases. 
Therefore,
 depersonalization/derealization disorder should not be diagnosed when the symptoms occur only
 during panic attacks that are part of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, or specific phobia. In
 addition, it is not uncommon for depersonalization/derealization symptoms to first begin in the
 context of new-onset panic attacks or as panic disorder progresses and worsens. In such
 presentations, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder can be made if 1) the
 depersonalization/derealization component of the presentation is very prominent from the start,
 clearly exceeding in duration and intensity the occurrence of actual panic attacks; or 2) the
depersonalization/derealization continues after panic disorder has remitted or has been
 successfully treated.
 Psychotic disorders.
 The presence of intact reality testing specifically regarding the
 depersonalization/derealization 
symptoms 
is 
essential 
to 
differentiating
 depersonalization/derealization disorder from psychotic disorders. Rarely, positive-symptom
 schizophrenia can pose a diagnostic challenge when nihilistic delusions are present. For example,
 an individual may complain that he or she is dead or the world is not real; this could be either a
 subjective experience that the individual knows is not true or a delusional conviction.
 Substance/medication-induced disorders.
 Depersonalization/derealization associated with the
 physiological effects of substances during acute intoxication or withdrawal is not diagnosed as
 depersonalization/derealization disorder. The most common precipitating substances are the
 illicit drugs marijuana, hallucinogens, ketamine, ecstasy, and salvia. In
 347
 about 15% of all cases of depersonalization/derealization disorder, the symptoms are precipitated
 by ingestion of such substances. If the symptoms persist for some time in the absence of any
 further substance or medication use, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder
 applies. This diagnosis is usually easy to establish since the vast majority of individuals with this
 presentation become highly phobic and aversive to the triggering substance and do not use it
 again.
 Traumatic brain injury.
 Depersonalization/derealization symptoms are typical in traumatic brain
 injury (TBI) but are distinguished from depersonalization/derealization disorder by onset of
 symptoms following TBI and the lack of other symptoms of depersonalization/derealization
 disorder.
 Dissociative symptoms due to another medical condition.
 Features such as onset after age 40 years or
 the presence of atypical symptoms and course in any individual suggest the possibility of an
 underlying medical condition. In cases with dissociative symptoms, it is essential to conduct a
 thorough medical and neurological evaluation, which may include standard laboratory studies,
 viral titers, an electroencephalogram, vestibular testing, visual testing, sleep studies, and/or brain
 imaging. When the suspicion of an underlying seizure disorder proves difficult to confirm, an
 ambulatory electroencephalogram may be indicated; although temporal lobe epilepsy is most
 commonly implicated, parietal and frontal lobe epilepsy may also be associated.
 