Differential Diagnosis
 Dissociative amnesia.
 Both dissociative identity disorder and dissociative amnesia are
 characterized by gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information, or
 traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting. Dissociative identity disorder is
 distinguished from dissociative amnesia by the additional presence of identity disruption
 characterized by two or more distinct personality states.
 Depersonalization/derealization disorder.
 The essential feature of depersonalization/derealization
 disorder is persistent or recurrent episodes of depersonalization, derealization, or both.
 Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder do not experience the presence of
 personality/identity states with alterations of self and agency, nor do they typically report
 dissociative amnesia.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Most individuals with dissociative identity disorder endorse a lifelong
 negative posttraumatic emotional state, often with childhood onset, and their symptoms may
 appear to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode. Moreover, posttraumatic reactivity to
 times of year when trauma occurred (anniversary reactions), primarily manifesting with more
 despondency, distress, and suicidal ideation, may also appear to be major depressive disorder,
 with seasonal pattern. However, individuals with major depressive disorder or persistent
 depressive disorder do not experience dissociative fluctuations in self and agency and
 dissociative amnesia. It is important to assess if all or most identity states are experiencing the
 adverse mood state, since mood disorder symptoms may fluctuate because they are experienced
 in some identity states, but not others.
 Bipolar disorders.
 Dissociative identity disorder is commonly misdiagnosed as bipolar disorder,
 typically bipolar II disorder, with mixed features. The relatively rapid shifts in behavioral state in
 individuals with dissociative identity disorder—usually within minutes or hours—are atypical for
 even the most rapid-cycling individuals with bipolar disorders. These state alterations are due to
 rapidly shifting dissociative states and/or fluctuating posttraumatic intrusions. Sometimes these
 shifts are accompanied by rapid changes in levels of activation, but these usually last minutes to
 hours, not days, and are associated with activation of specific identity states. Elevated or
 depressed mood may be experienced as loculated in specific identities, through
 overlap/interference phenomena. Usually, the individual with dissociative identity disorder does
 not have a classic bipolar sleep disturbance (e.g., reduced need for sleep), instead suffering from
 chronic, severe nightmares and nocturnal flashbacks that interrupt sleep.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 A majority of individuals with dissociative identity disorder will
 have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for comorbid PTSD. Dissociative symptoms
 characteristic of dissociative identity disorder should be differentiated from the dissociative
 amnesia, dissociative flashbacks, and depersonalization/derealization characteristic of acute
 stress disorder, PTSD, or the dissociative subtype of PTSD. Dissociative amnesia in PTSD
 typically manifests only for specific traumatic events or aspects of traumatic events, as opposed
to the chronic, complex dissociative amnesia characteristic of dissociative identity disorder.
 Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in the dissociative subtype of PTSD are related to
 specific posttraumatic reminders. Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in dissociative
 identity disorder may occur not only in response to posttraumatic reminders, but also in an
 ongoing fashion in daily life, including in response to stressful interpersonal interactions and
 when there is overlap/interference between states.
 Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may
 experience symptoms that can superficially appear similar to those of psychotic
 336
 disorders. These include auditory hallucinations and symptoms characteristic of intrusions of
 personality states into the individual’s awareness; these symptoms can seemingly resemble some
 of the Schneiderian first-rank symptoms formerly considered indicative of schizophrenia (e.g.,
 thought broadcasting, thought insertion, thought withdrawal, hearing voices keeping up a
 running commentary about the individual). For example, hearing different personality states
 discussing the individual can resemble auditory hallucinations of voices arguing in
 schizophrenia. The individual with dissociative identity disorder may also experience the
 thoughts or emotions of an intruding personality state, which can resemble thought insertion in
 schizophrenia, as well as experience the sudden disappearance of these thoughts or emotions,
 which can resemble thought withdrawal. Such experiences in an individual with schizophrenia
 are usually accompanied by delusional beliefs about the cause of those symptoms (i.e., thoughts
 being inserted by an outside force), whereas individuals with dissociative identity disorder
 typically experience these symptoms as ego-alien and frightening. Individuals with dissociative
 identity disorder may also report a range of visual, tactile, olfactory, gustatory, and somatic
 hallucinations, which are usually related to autohypnotic, posttraumatic, and dissociative factors,
 such as partial flashbacks, in contrast to individuals with schizophrenia, whose hallucinations are
 primarily auditory and less commonly visual. Dissociative identity disorder and psychotic
 disorders are therefore distinguished by symptoms characteristic of one of these conditions and
 not the other (e.g., dissociative amnesia in dissociative identity disorder and not in psychotic
 disorders). Finally, individuals with schizophrenia have low hypnotic capacity, whereas
 individuals with dissociative identity disorder have the highest hypnotic capacity among all
 clinical groups.
 Substance/medication-induced disorders.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder frequently
 have a current or past history of substance use disorders. Symptoms associated with the
 physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts) should be distinguished from dissociative
 amnesia in dissociative identity disorder if the substance in question is judged to be etiologically
 related to the memory loss.
 Personality disorders.
 Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often present identities that
 appear to encapsulate a variety of severe personality disorder features, suggesting a differential
 diagnosis of personality disorder, especially of the borderline type. Importantly, however, the
 individual’s longitudinal variability in personality style (attributable to inconsistency among
 identities) differs from the pervasive and persistent dysfunction in affect management and
 interpersonal relationships typical of those with personality disorders.
Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury.
 Both dissociative identity disorder and traumatic brain
 injury (TBI) are characterized by gaps in memory. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of
 consciousness, disorientation and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs and
 symptoms. A neurocognitive disorder due to TBI manifests either immediately after brain injury
 occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness after the injury, and persists
 past the acute postinjury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder
 following TBI is variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive
 function, and learning and memory, as well as slowed speed of information processing and
 disturbances in social cognition. While depersonalization is not uncommon following TBI, the
 additional neurocognitive features noted above help distinguish it from dissociative amnesia that
 is part of dissociative identity disorder. Moreover, dissociative amnesia occurring in the context
 of dissociative identity disorder is accompanied by a marked discontinuity in sense of self and
 sense of agency, which are not features of TBI.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
 Functional neurological symptom
 disorder may be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder by the absence of identity
 alteration characterized by two or more distinct personality states or an
 337
 experience of possession. Dissociative amnesia in functional neurological symptom disorder is
 more limited and circumscribed (e.g., amnesia for a nonepileptic seizure).
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder usually do
 not report the subtle symptoms of intrusion characteristic of the disorder; instead they tend to
 overreport media-based symptoms of the disorder, such as dramatic dissociative amnesia and
 melodramatic switching behaviors, while underreporting less-publicized comorbid symptoms,
 such as depression. Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder tend to be relatively
 undisturbed by or may even seem to enjoy “having” the disorder, or may ask clinicians to “find”
 traumatic memories. In contrast, most individuals with genuine dissociative identity disorder are
 ashamed of and overwhelmed by their symptoms, deny the diagnosis, underreport their
 symptoms, and display minimization and avoidance of their trauma history.
 Individuals who feign the symptoms of dissociative identity disorder usually create limited,
 stereotyped alternate identities, with feigned amnesia related only to the events for which gain is
 sought, with apparent switching behaviors and amnesia only displayed while being observed.
 They may present an “all-good” identity and an “all-bad” identity in hopes of gaining
 exculpation for a crime.