Differential Diagnosis
 Dissociative identity disorder.
 Recurrent episodes of dissociative amnesia may be attributable to
 dissociative identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative amnesia may report depersonalization
 and auto-hypnotic symptoms, as do individuals with dissociative
 341
 identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder report pervasive discontinuities
 in sense of self and agency, accompanied by many other dissociative symptoms. Amnesias in
 dissociative identity disorder, in addition to retrospective autobiographical memory deficits,
 include ongoing amnesia (“time loss”) for everyday events and interpersonal interactions;
 finding unexplained possessions; perplexing major fluctuations in skills and knowledge; and
 frequent, brief amnesic gaps during interpersonal interactions.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 Some individuals with PTSD cannot recall part or all of a specific
 traumatic event (e.g., a rape victim who cannot recall most events for the entire day of the rape).
 When that amnesia extends to events beyond the immediate time of the trauma, a comorbid
 diagnosis of dissociative amnesia may be warranted. Individuals with the dissociative subtype of
 PTSD may also report dissociative amnesia in addition to depersonalization/derealization.
 Neurocognitive disorders.
 In major neurocognitive disorders, there is typically evidence of neural
 tissue damage accompanied by a decline in cognitive function with deficits in attention,
 executive function, learning and memory, language, and perceptual-motor and social cognition
 that impair capacity for independent everyday activities. Memory loss for personal information is
 usually embedded in cognitive, linguistic, affective, attentional, and behavioral disturbances.
 Generally, awareness of personal identity is spared until late in the course of the neurocognitive
 disorder. In neurocognitive disorders, retrograde amnesia is almost always accompanied by
 anterograde amnesia. Anterograde dissociative amnesia can be confused with delirium. However,
 medical, laboratory, toxicological, and neurological workups, including imaging studies, are
 normal. Careful, repeated evaluations over time will show that as in other forms of dissociative
 amnesia, there are no true neurocognitive deficits.
 Substance-related disorders.
 In the context of repeated intoxication with alcohol or other
 substances/medications, there may be episodes of “blackouts” or periods for which the individual
 has no memory, or partial memory (“grayouts”). To aid in distinguishing these episodes from
 dissociative amnesia, a longitudinal history should show that the amnestic episodes occur only in
 the context of intoxication. However, the distinction may be difficult when the individual with
 dissociative amnesia also misuses alcohol or other substances, particularly in the context of
 stressful situations that may also exacerbate dissociative symptoms. This can be a more complex
 differential diagnosis when the substance use begins in childhood or adolescence, generally in
 the context of intrafamilial abuse, neglect, and substance-related disorders. Sequential
 observation of these individuals after detoxification, along with carefully taken history, usually
 can distinguish the memory loss attributable to long-standing substance use from dissociative
 amnesia. Some individuals with comorbid dissociative amnesia and substance use disorders will
 attempt to minimize their dissociative amnesia and attribute memory problems solely to the
substance use. Prolonged use of alcohol or other substances may result in a substance-induced
 neurocognitive disorder that may be associated with impaired cognitive function. However, in
 this context the protracted history of substance use and the persistent deficits associated with the
 neurocognitive disorder would serve to distinguish it from dissociative amnesia, where there is
 typically no evidence of persistent impairment in intellectual functioning.
 Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury.
 Amnesia may occur in the context of a TBI when there
 has been an impact to the head or other mechanisms of rapid movement or displacement of the
 brain within the skull. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of consciousness, disorientation
 and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs and symptoms (e.g., abnormalities on
 neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder,
 visual field cuts, anosmia). A neurocognitive disorder attributable to TBI must present either
 immediately after brain injury occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness
 after the injury, and persist past the
 342
 acute postinjury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder following TBI is
 variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive function,
 learning and memory, as well as slowed speed of information processing and disturbances in
 social cognition. The patterns of memory deficits are typical of neurocognitive disorders. Mild
 TBI may precede acute dissociative amnesia presentations, but the dissociative memory deficits
 are out of proportion to the TBI head trauma and typically follow the dissociative, not the
 neurocognitive, patterns.
 Seizure disorders.
 Individuals with seizure disorders may exhibit complex behavior during
 seizures or postictally with subsequent amnesia. Some individuals with a seizure disorder engage
 in nonpurposive wandering that is limited to the period of seizure activity. Conversely, behavior
 during a dissociative fugue is usually purposeful, complex, and goal-directed and may last for
 days, weeks, or longer. Occasionally, individuals with a seizure disorder will report that some
 autobiographical memories have been “wiped out” as the seizure disorder progresses. Such
 memory loss is not associated with psychological trauma or adversities and appears to occur
 randomly. In seizure disorders, serial electroencephalograms usually show abnormalities.
 Telemetric electroencephalographic monitoring generally shows an association between the
 episodes of amnesia and seizure activity. Dissociative and epileptic amnesias may coexist.
 Memory deficits associated with electroconvulsive therapy.
 Memory deficits after electroconvulsive
 therapy (ECT) most commonly occur for the day of ECT administration. More extensive
 retrograde and even anterograde amnesia after ECT is usually unrelated to stressful or traumatic
 life epochs, and generally remits after the ECT series concludes. ECT in severely depressed
 individuals with dissociative disorders does not worsen dissociation, and memory access may
 improve as depression remits.
 Catatonic stupor.
 Mutism in catatonic stupor may suggest dissociative amnesia, but failure of
 recall is usually absent. Other catatonic symptoms (e.g., rigidity, posturing, negativism) are
 usually present. Catatonic symptoms in children can be associated with trauma, abuse, and/or
 deprivation. Unlike in dissociative amnesia, the pattern of memory loss in catatonia is only for
 the catatonic episode.
Acute dissociative reactions to stressful events (other specified dissociative disorder).
 The 
acute
 dissociative reactions to stressful events example of other specified dissociative disorder is
 characterized by a combination of dissociative symptoms that occur together acutely in response
 to stressful events and typically last less than 1 month. Amnestic episodes that occur as part of
 these reactions are accompanied by other prominent dissociative symptoms, have a short
 duration (hours or days), and tend to be circumscribed to limited periods or events in a person’s
 life (micro-amnesias).
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 There is no test, battery of tests, or set of procedures that
 invariably distinguishes dissociative amnesia from feigned amnesia. Feigned amnesia is more
 common in individuals with 1) acute, florid dissociative amnesia; 2) financial, sexual, or legal
 problems; 3) a wish to escape stressful circumstances; 4) a desire to seem to be a more
 interesting patient; and/or 5) a plan to engage in litigation for “recovered memories.” However,
 dissociative amnesia can be associated with those same circumstances and can coexist with
 deliberate feigning. Many individuals who malinger amnesia confess spontaneously or when
 confronted.
 Memory changes with aging or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 Memory 
decrements 
in 
mild
 neurocognitive disorder differ from those of dissociative amnesia; in mild neurocognitive
 disorder, memory changes manifest as difficulty in learning and retaining new information. This
 is often measured in tests of verbal learning of word lists or a brief story with evaluation of
 immediate and delayed recall. With normal cognitive aging, individuals may also have similar
 weaknesses in immediate and delayed recall of new information,
 343
 although normal aging may also affect information processing speed and other complex
 executive function tasks in addition to memory.