 Comorbidity
 Individuals with OCD often have other psychopathology. Many adults with the disorder in the
 United States have a lifetime diagnosis of an anxiety disorder (76%; e.g., panic disorder, social
 anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia) or a depressive or bipolar
 disorder (63% for any depressive or bipolar disorder, with the most common being major
 depressive disorder [41%]); a lifetime diagnosis of an impulse-control disorder (56%) or a
 substance use disorder (39%) is also common. Onset of OCD is usually later than for most
F45.22
 comorbid anxiety disorders (with the exception of separation anxiety disorder) and PTSD but
 often precedes that of depressive disorders. In a study of 214 treatment-seeking adults in the
 United States with DSM-IV OCD at intake, comorbid obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
 was found in 23%–32% of individuals followed longitudinally.
 Up to 30% of individuals with OCD also have a lifetime tic disorder. A comorbid tic disorder
 is most common in men with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals tend to differ from
 those without a history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD symptoms, comorbidity,
 course, and pattern of familial transmission. A triad of OCD, tic disorder, and attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder can also be seen in children.
 Several obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, including body dysmorphic disorder,
 trichotillomania, and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, also occur more frequently in
 individuals with OCD than in those without OCD.
 OCD is also much more common in individuals with certain other disorders than would be
 expected based on its prevalence in the general population; when one of those other disorders is
 diagnosed, the individual should be assessed for OCD as well. For example, in individuals with
 schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the prevalence of OCD is approximately 12%. Rates
 of OCD are also elevated in bipolar disorder; eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and
 bulimia nervosa; body dysmorphic disorder; and Tourette’s disorder.