Schizoid Personality Disorder Diagnostic Criteria A. A pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal settings, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following: 1. Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part of a family. 2. Almost always chooses solitary activities. 3. Has little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences with another person. 4. Takes pleasure in few, if any, activities. 5. Lacks close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives. 742 6. Appears indifferent to the praise or criticism of others. 7. Shows emotional coldness, detachment, or flattened affectivity. B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder and is not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition. Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “schizoid personality disorder (premorbid).” Diagnostic Features The essential feature of schizoid personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal settings. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. Individuals with schizoid personality disorder appear to lack a desire for intimacy, seem indifferent to opportunities to develop close relationships, and do not seem to derive much satisfaction from being part of a family or other social group (Criterion A1). They prefer spending time by themselves, rather than being with other people. They often appear to be socially isolated or “loners” and almost always choose solitary activities or hobbies that do not include interaction with others (Criterion A2). They prefer mechanical or abstract tasks, such as computer or mathematical games. They may have very little interest in having sexual experiences with another person (Criterion A3) and take pleasure in few, if any, activities (Criterion A4). There is usually a reduced experience of pleasure from sensory, bodily, or interpersonal experiences, such as walking on a beach at sunset or having sex. These individuals have no close friends or confidants, except possibly a first-degree relative (Criterion A5). Individuals with schizoid personality disorder often seem indifferent to the approval or criticism of others and do not appear to be bothered by what others may think of them (Criterion A6). They may be oblivious to the normal subtleties of social interaction and often do not respond appropriately to social cues so that they seem socially inept or superficial and self- absorbed. They usually display a “bland” exterior without visible emotional reactivity and rarely reciprocate gestures or facial expressions, such as smiles or nods (Criterion A7). They claim that they rarely experience strong emotions such as anger and joy. They often display a constricted affect and appear cold and aloof. However, in those very unusual circumstances in which these individuals become at least temporarily comfortable in revealing themselves, they may acknowledge having painful feelings, particularly related to social interactions. Schizoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder, or if it is attributable to the physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another medical condition (Criterion B). Associated Features Individuals with schizoid personality disorder may have particular difficulty expressing anger, even in response to direct provocation, which contributes to the impression that they lack emotion. Their lives sometimes seem directionless, and they may appear to “drift” in their goals. Such individuals often react passively to adverse circumstances and have difficulty responding appropriately to important life events. Because of their lack of social skills and lack of desire for sexual experiences, individuals with this disorder have few friendships, date infrequently, and often do not marry. Occupational functioning may be impaired, particularly if interpersonal involvement is required, but individuals with this disorder may do well when they work under conditions of social isolation. 743 Prevalence Genetic and physiological. Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms. Autism spectrum disorder. Personality change due to another medical condition. Schizoid personality disorder is uncommon in clinical settings. The estimated prevalence of schizoid personality disorder based on a probability subsample from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 4.9%. The prevalence of schizoid personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions was 3.1%. A review of six epidemiological studies (four in the United States) found a median prevalence of 1.3%. Development and Course Schizoid personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with solitariness, poor peer relationships, and underachievement in school, which mark these children or adolescents as different and make them subject to teasing. Risk and Prognostic Factors Schizoid personality disorder may have increased prevalence in the relatives of individuals with schizophrenia or schizotypal personality disorder. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues Individuals from a variety of cultural backgrounds sometimes exhibit defensive behaviors and interpersonal styles that may be erroneously labeled as “schizoid.” For example, those who have moved from rural to metropolitan environments may react with “emotional freezing” that may last for several months and manifest as solitary activities, constricted affect, and other deficits in communication. Immigrants from other countries are sometimes mistakenly perceived as cold, hostile, or indifferent, which may be a response to social ostracism from the host society. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues While some research suggests that schizoid personality disorder may be more common in men, other research suggests that there is no gender difference in prevalence. Differential Diagnosis Schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of schizoid personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset of psychotic symptoms and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by schizoid personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder should also be recorded, followed by “premorbid” in parentheses. There may be great difficulty differentiating individuals with schizoid personality disorder from individuals with autism spectrum disorder, particularly with milder forms of either disorder, as both include a seeming indifference to companionship with others. However, autism spectrum disorder may be differentiated by stereotyped behaviors and interests. Schizoid personality disorder must be Substance use disorders. Other personality disorders and personality traits. F21 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition. 744 Schizoid personality disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use. Other personality disorders may be confused with schizoid personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to schizoid personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although characteristics of social isolation and restricted affectivity are common to schizoid, schizotypal, and paranoid personality disorders, schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from schizotypal personality disorder by the lack of cognitive and perceptual distortions and from paranoid personality disorder by the lack of suspiciousness and paranoid ideation. The social isolation of schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from that of avoidant personality disorder, which is attributable to fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate and excessive anticipation of rejection. In contrast, people with schizoid personality disorder have a more pervasive detachment and limited desire for social intimacy. Individuals with obsessive- compulsive personality disorder may also show an apparent social detachment stemming from devotion to work and discomfort with emotions, but they do have an underlying capacity for intimacy. Individuals who are “loners” or quite introverted may display personality traits that might be considered schizoid, consistent with the broader conceptualization of schizoid personality disorder as a disorder defined by pathological introversion/detachment. Only when these traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute schizoid personality disorder. Comorbidity Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very brief psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, schizoid personality disorder may appear as the premorbid antecedent of delusional disorder or schizophrenia. Individuals with this disorder may sometimes develop major depressive disorder. Schizoid personality disorder most often co-occurs with schizotypal, paranoid, and avoidant personality disorders.