Schizotypal Personality Disorder Diagnostic Criteria A. A pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of behavior, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following: 1. Ideas of reference (excluding delusions of reference). 2. Odd beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior and is inconsistent with subcultural norms (e.g., superstitiousness, belief in clairvoyance, telepathy, or “sixth sense”; in children and adolescents, bizarre fantasies or preoccupations). 3. Unusual perceptual experiences, including bodily illusions. 4. Odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, circumstantial, metaphorical, overelaborate, or stereotyped). 5. Suspiciousness or paranoid ideation. 6. Inappropriate or constricted affect. 745 7. Behavior or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar. 8. Lack of close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives. 9. Excessive social anxiety that does not diminish with familiarity and tends to be associated with paranoid fears rather than negative judgments about self. B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder. Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” e.g., “schizotypal personality disorder (premorbid).” Diagnostic Features The essential feature of schizotypal personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder often have ideas of reference (i.e., incorrect interpretations of casual incidents and external events as having a particular and unusual meaning specifically for the person) (Criterion A1). These should be distinguished from delusions of reference, in which the beliefs are held with delusional conviction. These individuals may be superstitious or preoccupied with paranormal phenomena that are outside the norms of their subculture (Criterion A2). They may feel that they have special powers to sense events before they happen or to read others’ thoughts. They may believe that they have magical control over others, which can be implemented directly (e.g., believing that their spouse’s taking the dog out for a walk is the direct result of thinking an hour earlier it should be done) or indirectly through compliance with magical rituals (e.g., walking past a specific object three times to avoid a certain harmful outcome). Perceptual alterations may be present (e.g., sensing that another person is present or hearing a voice murmuring their name) (Criterion A3). Their speech may include unusual or idiosyncratic phrasing and construction. It is often loose, digressive, or vague, but without actual derailment or incoherence (Criterion A4). Responses can be either overly concrete or overly abstract, and words or concepts are sometimes applied in unusual ways (e.g., the individual may state that he or she was not “talkable” at work). Individuals with this disorder are often suspicious and may have paranoid ideation (e.g., believing their colleagues at work are intent on undermining their reputation with the boss) (Criterion A5). They are usually not able to negotiate the full range of affects and interpersonal cuing required for successful relationships and thus often appear to interact with others in an inappropriate, stiff, or constricted fashion (Criterion A6). These individuals are often considered to be odd or eccentric because of unusual mannerisms, an often unkempt manner of dress that does not quite “fit together,” and inattention to the usual social conventions (e.g., the individual may avoid eye contact, wear clothes that are ink stained and ill-fitting, and be unable to join in the give-and-take banter of co-workers) (Criterion A7). Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder experience interpersonal relatedness as problematic and are uncomfortable relating to other people. Although they may express unhappiness about their lack of relationships, their behavior suggests a decreased desire for intimate contacts. As a result, they usually have no or few close friends or confidants other than a first-degree relative (Criterion A8). They are anxious in social situations, particularly those involving unfamiliar people (Criterion A9). They will interact with other individuals when they have to but prefer to keep to themselves because they feel that they are different and just do not “fit in.” Their social anxiety does not easily abate, even when they spend more time in the setting or become more familiar with the other people, because their anxiety tends to be associated with suspiciousness regarding others’ motivations. For example, when attending a dinner party, the individual with schizotypal 746 personality disorder will not become more relaxed as time goes on, but rather may become increasingly tense and suspicious. Schizotypal personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder (Criterion B). Associated Features Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder often seek treatment for the associated symptoms of anxiety or depression rather than for the personality disorder features per se. Prevalence The estimated prevalence of schizotypal personality disorder based on a probability subsample from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 3.3%.The prevalence of schizotypal personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions data was 3.9%. A review of five epidemiological studies (three in the United States) found a median prevalence of 0.6%. Genetic and physiological. Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms. Development and Course Schizotypal personality disorder has a relatively stable course, with only a small proportion of individuals going on to develop schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school, hypersensitivity, peculiar thoughts and language, and bizarre fantasies. These children may appear “odd” or “eccentric” and attract teasing. Risk and Prognostic Factors Schizotypal personality disorder appears to aggregate familially and is more prevalent among the first-degree biological relatives of individuals with schizophrenia than among the general population. There may also be a modest increase in schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in the relatives of probands with schizotypal personality disorder. Twin studies indicate highly stable genetic factors and rather transient environmental factors for an increased risk for the schizotypal syndrome, and genetic risk variants for schizophrenia may be linked to schizotypal personality disorder. Neuroimaging studies detect group-level differences in the size and function of specific brain regions in individuals with schizotypal personality disorder in comparison with healthy persons, individuals with schizophrenia, and individuals with other personality disorders. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues Cognitive and perceptual distortions must be evaluated in the context of the individual’s cultural milieu. Pervasive culturally determined characteristics, particularly those regarding supernatural and religious beliefs and practices (life beyond death, speaking in tongues, voodoo, shamanism, mind reading, sixth sense, evil eye, magical beliefs related to health and illness), can appear to be schizotypal to the uninformed clinician. Thus, observed cross-national and cross-ethnic variations in the prevalence and expression of schizotypal traits may be a true epidemiological finding or one due to differences in the cultural acceptance of these experiences. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Schizotypal personality disorder appears to be slightly more common in men than in women. 747 Differential Diagnosis Schizotypal personality disorder can be distinguished from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset of psychotic symptoms and persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by schizotypal personality disorder, schizotypal personality disorder should also be recorded, Neurodevelopmental disorders. Personality change due to another medical condition. Substance use disorders. Other personality disorders and personality traits. followed by “premorbid” in parentheses. There may be great difficulty differentiating children with schizotypal personality disorder from the heterogeneous group of solitary, odd children whose behavior is characterized by marked social isolation, eccentricity, or peculiarities of language and whose diagnoses would probably include milder forms of autism spectrum disorder or language communication disorders. Communication disorders may be differentiated by the primacy and severity of the disorder in language and by the characteristic features of impaired language found in a specialized language assessment. Milder forms of autism spectrum disorder are differentiated by the even greater lack of social awareness and emotional reciprocity and stereotyped behaviors and interests. Schizotypal personality disorder must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition. Schizotypal personality disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use. Other personality disorders may be confused with schizotypal personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to schizotypal personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although paranoid and schizoid personality disorders may also be characterized by social detachment and restricted affect, schizotypal personality disorder can be distinguished from these two diagnoses by the presence of cognitive or perceptual distortions and marked eccentricity or oddness. Close relationships are limited in both schizotypal personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder; however, in avoidant personality disorder an active desire for relationships is constrained by a fear of rejection, whereas in schizotypal personality disorder there is a lack of desire for relationships and persistent detachment. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder may also display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation, but in narcissistic personality disorder these qualities derive primarily from fears of having imperfections or flaws revealed. Individuals with borderline personality disorder may also have transient, psychotic-like symptoms, but these are usually more closely related to affective shifts in response to stress (e.g., intense anger, anxiety, disappointment) and are usually more dissociative (e.g., derealization, depersonalization). In contrast, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder are more likely to have enduring psychotic-like symptoms that may worsen under stress but are less likely to be invariably associated with pronounced affective symptoms. Although social isolation may occur in borderline personality disorder, it is usually secondary to repeated interpersonal failures due to angry outbursts and frequent mood shifts, rather than a result of a persistent lack of social contacts and desire for intimacy. Furthermore, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder do not usually demonstrate the impulsive or manipulative behaviors of the individual with 748 borderline personality disorder. However, there is a high rate of co-occurrence between the two disorders, so that making such distinctions is not always feasible. Schizotypal features during F60.2 adolescence may be reflective of transient emotional turmoil rather than an enduring personality disorder. Comorbidity Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience transient psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours), although they usually are insufficient in duration to warrant an additional diagnosis such as brief psychotic disorder or schizophreniform disorder. In some cases, clinically significant psychotic symptoms may develop that meet criteria for brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or schizophrenia. There is considerable co-occurrence with schizoid, paranoid, avoidant, and borderline personality disorders.