Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Cessation of (or reduction in) use of a substance that has been heavy and
 prolonged.
 B. The development of a substance-specific syndrome shortly after the cessation of
 (or reduction in) substance use.
 C. The substance-specific syndrome causes clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
 better explained by another mental disorder, including withdrawal from another
 substance.
 E. The substance involved cannot be classified under any of the other substance
 categories (alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
 anxiolytics; stimulants; or tobacco) or is unknown.
 Specify if:
 With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted when
 hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions
 occur in the absence of a delirium.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
 other (or unknown) substance use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual
 disturbances.
 For other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, without perceptual
 disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
 the ICD-10-CM code is F19.130, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.230. If there is
 no comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder (e.g., in a patient taking
 an other [or unknown] substance solely under appropriate medical supervision),
 then the ICD-10-CM code is F19.930.
 For other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, with perceptual
 disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
 the ICD-10-CM code is
 659
 F19.132, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown) substance use disorder
is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.232. If there is no comorbid other (or
 unknown) substance use disorder (e.g., in a patient taking an other [or unknown]
 substance solely under appropriate medical supervision), then the ICD-10-CM
 code is F19.932.
 Note: For information on Risk and Prognostic Factors and Diagnostic Markers, see the
 corresponding sections in Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal is a clinically significant syndrome that develops
 during or within a few hours to days after reducing or terminating dosing with a substance
 (Criteria A and B). Although recent dose reduction or termination usually is clear in the history,
 other diagnostic procedures are very challenging if the drug is unknown. Criterion B requires
 development of a “substance-specific syndrome” (i.e., the individual’s signs and symptoms must
 correspond with the known withdrawal syndrome for the recently stopped drug)—a requirement
 that rarely can be met with an unknown substance. Consequently, clinical judgment must guide
 such decisions when this information is limited. Criterion D requires ruling out other medical
 conditions, mental disorders, or withdrawals from familiar substances. When the substance is
 known, it should be reflected in the name of the disorder upon coding (e.g., “betel nut
 withdrawal”).
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of other (or unknown) substance withdrawal is unknown.
 Development and Course
 Withdrawal signs commonly appear some hours after use of the substance is terminated, but the
 onset and course vary greatly, depending on the dose typically used and the rate of elimination of
 the specific substance from the body. At peak severity, withdrawal symptoms from some
 substances involve only moderate levels of discomfort, whereas withdrawal from other
 substances may be fatal. Withdrawal-associated dysphoria often motivates relapse to substance
 use. Withdrawal symptoms slowly abate over days, weeks, or months, depending on the
 particular drug and doses to which the individual became tolerant.
 Functional Consequences of Other (or Unknown) Substance
 Withdrawal
 Withdrawal from any substance may have serious consequences, including physical signs and
 symptoms (e.g., malaise, vital sign changes, abdominal distress, headache), intense drug craving,
 anxiety, depression, agitation, psychotic symptoms, or cognitive impairments. These
 consequences may lead to problems such as dysfunction at work, problems in interpersonal
 relationships, failure to fulfill role obligations, traffic accidents, fighting, high-risk behavior (e.g.,
 having unprotected sex), suicide attempts, and substance or medication overdose. The pattern of
 consequences will vary with the particular substance.
Differential Diagnosis
 Dose reduction after extended dosing, but not meeting the criteria for other (or unknown)
 substance withdrawal.
 The individual used other (or unknown) substances, but the dose that was used was insufficient
 to produce symptoms that meet the criteria required for the withdrawal diagnosis.
 Substance withdrawal or other substance/medication-induced mental disorders.
 Familiar 
substances
 may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may experience withdrawal
 when discontinuing those substances. History, toxicology screens, or
 660
 chemical testing of the substance itself may help to identify it. Other substance withdrawal is
 distinguished from other substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., venlafaxine
induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in
 these latter disorders are in excess of symptoms (if known) usually associated with the specific
 substance withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant
 clinical attention.
 Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious disorders that impair brain
 function and cognition.
 Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce rapid onset of signs and
 symptoms mimicking those of withdrawals. Paradoxically, drug intoxications also must be ruled
 out; for example, lethargy may indicate withdrawal from one drug or intoxication with another
 substance.
 Comorbidity
 As with all substance-related disorders, conduct disorder in adolescence, antisocial personality
 disorder, and other substance use disorders are likely to co-occur with other (or unknown)
 substance withdrawal.