Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of use of an intoxicating substance not able to be
 classified within the alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogen (phencyclidine and
 others); inhalant; opioid; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic; stimulant; or tobacco
 categories and leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as
 manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
 1. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
 was intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use
 of the substance.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the substance,
 use the substance, or recover from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the substance.
 5. Recurrent use of the substance resulting in a failure to fulfill major role
 obligations at work, school, or home.
6. Continued use of the substance despite having persistent or recurrent social
 or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of its use.
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of use of the substance.
 8. Recurrent use of the substance in situations in which it is physically
 hazardous.
 9. Use of the substance is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent
 or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been
 caused or exacerbated by the substance.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to achieve
 intoxication or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 the substance.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for other (or unknown) substance
 (refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria sets for other [or unknown]
 substance withdrawal).
 653
 b. The substance (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
 withdrawal symptoms.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for other (or unknown) substance use
 disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12
 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge
 to use the substance,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for other (or unknown) substance use
 disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder have been met at any time during a period of 12 months
 or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or
 urge to use the substance,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to the substance is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If an other (or unknown) substance
 intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, or other (or unknown)
 substance–induced mental disorder is present, do not use the codes below for other
 (or unknown) substance use disorder. Instead, the comorbid other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the other (or unknown)
substance–induced disorder code (see the coding note for other [or unknown]
 substance intoxication, other [or unknown] substance withdrawal, or specific other
 [or unknown] substance–induced mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid
 other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder and other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder, only the other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive
 disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid other
 (or unknown) substance use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F19.14 for other
 (or unknown) substance use disorder with other (or unknown) substance–induced
 depressive disorder or F19.24 for a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder with other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive
 disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 F19.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F19.11 Mild, In early remission
 F19.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F19.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F19.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F19.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F19.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F19.21 Severe, In early remission
 F19.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 654
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic class other (or unknown) substance–related disorders applies to substances that
 are not included within any of the nine substance classes presented earlier in this chapter (i.e., to
 alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens [phencyclidine and others]; inhalants; opioids;
 sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants; or tobacco). Such substances include anabolic
 steroids; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; corticosteroids; antiparkinsonian medications;
 antihistamines; nitrous oxide; amyl-, butyl-, or isobutyl-nitrites; betel nut, which is chewed in
 many geographic regions to produce mild euphoria and a floating sensation; and kava (from a
 South Pacific pepper plant), which produces mild euphoria, sedation, incoordination, and weight
 loss, as well as health effects (e.g., mild hepatitis, lung abnormalities). Note that gaseous
 substances are included with the inhalant category only if they are hydrocarbon agents; other
gaseous substances (including nitrous oxide mentioned above) are included in the other (or
 unknown) substance category. Unknown substance–related disorders are associated with
 unidentified substances, such as intoxications in which the individual cannot identify the
 ingested drug, or substance use disorders involving either new, black market drugs not yet
 identified or familiar drugs illegally sold under false names.
 Note that substances included within the scope of one of the substance classes should be
 coded within that respective substance class and are inappropriate to include in the “other
 substance” category. For example, the following substances are explicitly included in specific
 substance classes and should not be included in the “other substance” category: synthetic
 cannabinoids are included in the cannabis category; propofol is included in the sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic category; and cathinones (including khât plant agents and synthetic
 chemical derivatives) are included in the stimulant category.
 Other (or unknown) substance use disorder is a mental disorder in which repeated use of an
 other or unknown substance typically continues, despite the individual’s knowing that the
 substance is causing serious problems for the individual. Those problems are reflected in the
 diagnostic criteria. When the substance is known but does not fit within any of the other nine
 substance classes, it should be reflected when recording and coding the name of the disorder
 (e.g., “nitrous oxide use disorder,” using the applicable code for other [or unknown] substance
 use disorder).
 Associated Features
 A diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance use disorder is supported by any of the following:
 the individual’s reported use of a substance that is not among the nine classes listed in this
 chapter; recurring episodes of intoxication with negative results in standard drug screens, which
 may not detect new or rarely used substances; and the presence of symptoms characteristic of an
 unidentified substance that has newly appeared in the individual’s community.
 Because of access to nitrous oxide (“laughing gas”), membership in certain populations may
 be associated with frequent use of the substance and possibly with a diagnosis of nitrous oxide
 use disorder. The role of this gas as an anesthetic agent leads to misuse by some medical and
 dental professionals, and its use as a propellant for commercial products (e.g., whipped cream
 dispensers) contributes to misuse by food service workers. Nitrous oxide misuse by adolescents
 and young adults is significant, and some individuals with very frequent use may present with
 serious medical complications and mental conditions, including myeloneuropathy, spinal cord
 subacute combined degeneration, peripheral neuropathy, and psychosis.
 Use of amyl-, butyl-, and isobutyl (and similar) nitrite gases is prevalent among homosexual
 men and some adolescents, especially those with conduct disorder.
 Substance use disorders generally are associated with elevated risks of suicide, but there is no
 evidence of unique risk factors for suicide with other (or unknown) substance use disorder.
 655
 Prevalence
 Based on extremely limited data, the prevalence of most other (or unknown) substance use
 disorders is likely lower than that of use disorders involving the nine substance classes in this
chapter. For certain gaseous substances, prevalence of use is not rare (lifetime prevalence in the
 U.S. household population for individuals age 12 and older is estimated at 4.6% for nitrous oxide
 and 2.5% for nitrites), but how often the patterns of use qualify for a use disorder is unknown.
 Development and Course
 No single pattern of development or course characterizes the pharmacologically varied other (or
 unknown) substance use disorders. Often unknown substance use disorders will be reclassified
 when the unknown substance eventually is identified.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Risk and prognostic factors for other (or unknown) substance use disorders are thought to be
 similar to those for most substance use disorders and include the presence of any other substance
 use disorders, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder in the individual or the
 individual’s family; early onset of substance problems; easy availability of the substance in the
 individual’s environment; childhood maltreatment or trauma; and evidence of limited early self
control and behavioral disinhibition.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Certain cultures may be associated with other (or unknown) substance use disorders involving
 specific indigenous substances within the cultural region, such as betel nut.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Urine, breath, or saliva tests may correctly identify a commonly used substance falsely sold as a
 novel product. However, routine clinical tests usually cannot identify truly unusual or new
 substances, which may require testing in specialized laboratories.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Use of other or unknown substances without meeting criteria for other (or unknown) substance
 use disorder.
 Use of unknown substances is not rare among adolescents, but most use does not meet the
 diagnostic standard of two or more criteria for other (or unknown) substance use disorder in a
 12-month period.
 Substance use disorders.
 Other (or unknown) substance use disorder may co-occur with various
 substance use disorders that involve any of the nine substance classes presented earlier in this
 chapter, and the symptoms of the disorders may be similar and overlapping. To disentangle
 symptom patterns, it is helpful to inquire about which symptoms persisted during periods when
 some of the substances were not being used.
 Other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, and
 other (or unknown) substance–induced mental disorders.
 Other (or unknown) substance use disorder is differentiated from other (or unknown) substance
 intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, and other-(or unknown) substance
induced mental disorders (e.g., corticosteroid-induced bipolar and related disorder) in that other
 (or unknown) substance use disorder describes a problematic pattern of use of the other (or
 unknown) substance that involves impaired control over the use of the substance, social
impairment attributable to use of the substance, risky use of the substance (e.g., continued use
 despite medical complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of
 656
 tolerance or withdrawal), whereas other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or
 unknown) substance withdrawal, and other (or unknown) substance-induced mental disorders
 describe psychiatric syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Other (or unknown)
 substance intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, and other (or unknown)
 substance–induced mental disorders may occur in individuals with other (or unknown) substance
 use disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or
 unknown) substance withdrawal, or other (or unknown) substance–induced mental disorder
 should be given in addition to a diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance use disorder, the
 presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Comorbidity
 Substance use disorders, including other (or unknown) substance use disorder, are commonly
 comorbid with one another, with conduct disorder in adolescence, and with antisocial personality
 disorder.