Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The development of a reversible substance-specific syndrome attributable to
 recent ingestion of (or exposure to) a substance that is not listed elsewhere or is
 unknown.
 B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes that are
 attributable to the effect of the substance on the central nervous system (e.g.,
 impaired motor coordination, psychomotor agitation or retardation, euphoria,
 anxiety, belligerence, mood lability, cognitive impairment, impaired judgment,
 social withdrawal) and develop during, or shortly after, use of the substance.
 C. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 Specify if:
 With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted when
 hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions
 occur in the absence of a delirium.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid other
 (or unknown) substance use disorder involving the same substance and whether or
 not there are perceptual disturbances.
For other (or unknown) substance intoxication, without perceptual
 disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
 the ICD-10-CM code is F19.120, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.220. If there is
 no comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM
 code is F19.920.
 For other (or unknown) substance intoxication, with perceptual
 disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
 the ICD-10-CM code is F19.122, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
 substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.222. If there is
 no comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM
 code is F19.922.
 Note: For information on Risk and Prognostic Factors, Culture-Related Diagnostic
 Issues, and Diagnostic Markers, see the corresponding sections in Other (or Unknown)
 Substance Use Disorder.
 657
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of other (or unknown) substance intoxication is the presence of clinically
 significant behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or immediately after, use of
 either a) a substance not included within one of the nine substance classes presented in this
 chapter (i.e., alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; phencyclidine and other hallucinogens; inhalants;
 opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants; or tobacco) or b) an unknown substance.
 If the substance is known, it should be reflected in the name of the disorder upon coding (e.g.,
 “kava intoxication”).
 Application of the diagnostic criteria for other (or unknown) substance intoxication is very
 challenging. Criterion A requires development of a reversible “substance-specific syndrome,”
 but if the substance is unknown, that syndrome usually will be unknown. To resolve this conflict,
 clinicians may ask the individual or obtain collateral history as to whether the individual has
 experienced a similar episode after using substances with the same “street” name or from the
 same source. Similarly, hospital emergency departments sometimes recognize over a few days
 numerous presentations of a severe, unfamiliar intoxication syndrome from a newly available,
 previously unknown substance. Because of the great variety of intoxicating substances, Criterion
 B can provide only broad examples of signs and symptoms from some intoxications, with no
 threshold for the number of symptoms required for a diagnosis; clinical judgment guides those
 decisions. Criterion C requires ruling out other medical conditions, mental disorders, or
 intoxications.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of other (or unknown) substance intoxication is unknown.
 Development and Course
Intoxications usually appear and then peak minutes to hours after use of the substance, but the
 onset and course vary with the substance and the route of administration. Generally, substances
 used by pulmonary inhalation and intravenous injection have the most rapid onset of action,
 whereas those ingested by mouth and requiring metabolism to an active product are much
 slower. (For example, after ingestion of certain mushrooms, the first signs of an eventually fatal
 intoxication may not appear for a few days.) Intoxication effects usually resolve within hours to a
 very few days. However, the body may completely eliminate an anesthetic gas such as nitrous
 oxide just minutes after use ends. At the other extreme, some “hit-and-run” intoxicating
 substances poison systems, leaving permanent impairments. For example, MPTP (1-methyl-4
phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine), a contaminating by-product in the synthesis of a certain
 opioid, kills dopaminergic cells and induces permanent parkinsonism in individuals who had
 sought opioid intoxication.
 Functional Consequences of Other (or Unknown) Substance
 Intoxication
 Impairment from intoxication with any substance may have serious consequences, including
 dysfunction at work, social indiscretions, problems in interpersonal relationships, failure to fulfill
 role obligations, traffic accidents, fighting, high-risk behaviors (i.e., having unprotected sex), and
 substance or medication overdose. The pattern of consequences will vary with the particular
 substance.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Use of other or unknown substance, without meeting criteria for other (or unknown) substance
 intoxication.
 The individual used an other or unknown substance(s), but the dose was insufficient to produce
 symptoms that meet the diagnostic criteria required for the diagnosis.
 658
 Substance intoxication or other substance/medication-induced mental disorders.
 Familiar 
substances
 may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may experience intoxication
 from those substances. History, toxicology screens, or chemical testing of the substance itself
 may help to identify it. Other substance intoxication is distinguished from other
 substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., corticosteroid-induced anxiety disorder)
 because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those (if known)
 usually associated with the specific substance intoxication, predominate in the clinical
 presentation, and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious disorders that impair brain
 function and cognition.
 Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce rapid onset of signs and
 symptoms mimicking those of intoxications, including the examples in Criterion B.
 Paradoxically, drug withdrawals also must be ruled out; for example, lethargy may indicate
 withdrawal from one drug or intoxication with another substance.
 Comorbidity
As with all substance-related disorders, conduct disorder in adolescence, antisocial personality
 disorder, and other substance use disorders tend to co-occur with other (or unknown) substance
 intoxication.