Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to HIV
 Infection
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. There is documented infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
 C. The neurocognitive disorder is not better explained by non-HIV conditions,
 including secondary brain diseases such as progressive multifocal
 leukoencephalopathy or cryptococcal meningitis.
 D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
 is not better explained by a mental disorder.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, with behavioral disturbance,
 code first B20 HIV infection, followed by F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder due
 to HIV infection, with behavioral disturbance.
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, without behavioral
 disturbance, code first B20 HIV infection, followed by F02.80 major neurocognitive
 disorder due to HIV infection, without behavioral disturbance.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, code G31.84. (Note: Do not
 use the additional code for HIV infection. “With behavioral disturbance” and “without
 behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
 718
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection: Use additional
 code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to HIV infection
 (e.g., F06.34 bipolar and related disorder due to HIV infection, with mixed features;
 F07.0 personality change due to traumatic brain injury, apathetic type).
 Diagnostic Features
 HIV disease is caused by infection with human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1), which
 is acquired through exposure to bodily fluids of an infected individual through injection
 substance use, unprotected sexual contact, or accidental or iatrogenic exposure (e.g., needle
 puncture injury to medical personnel). HIV infects several types of cells, most particularly “T
helper” (CD4) lymphocytes and monocytes. Over time, the infection can cause severe decreases
 in the CD4 count, resulting in severe immunocompromise, often leading to opportunistic
 infections and neoplasms. Infected monocytes can enter the central nervous system, leading to
 infection of macrophages and microglia. A small percentage of astrocytes may harbor productive
HIV infection. The advanced form of HIV infection is termed acquired immune deficiency
 syndrome (AIDS). Diagnosis of HIV is confirmed by established laboratory methods, such as the
 reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for HIV RNA and the
 antibody/antigen combination test. Of note, in-home self-testing for HIV is available.
 Some individuals with HIV infection develop a neurocognitive disorder (NCD), which
 generally shows a “subcortical pattern” with prominently impaired executive function, slowing
 of processing speed, problems with more demanding attentional tasks, and difficulty in learning
 new information, but fewer problems with recall of learned information. In major NCD, slowing
 may be prominent. Language difficulties, such as aphasia, are uncommon, although reductions in
 fluency may be observed. HIV pathogenic processes can affect any part of the brain; therefore,
 other patterns are possible.
 Associated Features
 Major or mild NCD due to HIV infection is more prevalent in individuals of increasing age,
 lower educational level, or female sex, and among those with major depressive disorder, alcohol
 or other substance use disorders, and medical comorbidities (particularly diabetes and
 hypertension). The NCD risk due to HIV infection is also increased with any of the following:
 prior episodes of immunosuppression, high viral loads in the cerebrospinal fluid, and increased
 levels of tumor necrosis factor–alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), C-reactive protein, D-dimer,
 sCD14, sCD163, and neurofilament light chain in the peripheral blood or clinical laboratory
 indicators of advanced HIV disease, such as a low CD4 cell nadir, anemia, and
 hypoalbuminemia. Individuals with major NCD may show more prominent neuromotor features,
 such as severe incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing. These features may become more
 prominent with NCD disease progression.
 Prevalence
 Depending on the clinical stage of HIV disease, approximately one-third to over one-half of
 HIV-infected individuals have at least some evidence of a neurocognitive disturbance, but most
 of these disturbances would not meet criteria for mild NCD and would instead represent
 individuals with asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI), who may have substandard
 performance on one or more tests of neurocognitive abilities but do not have any impairment in
 functional status. Rates in North America and Western Europe have largely shown that ANI
 accounts for the majority of neurocognitive disturbances, whereas mild NCD due to HIV
 accounts for approximately one-quarter of individuals, and major NCD criteria are met for
 typically less than 5% of individuals with HIV-related neurocognitive disturbances. In Germany,
 the overall prevalence of HIV-associated NCDs among HIV
 719
 clinic participants was 43%, 90% of whom were in treatment: 20% had ANI, 17% had mild
 NCD, and 6% had HIV-associated dementia. In low- and middle-income countries, prevalence of
 HIV-associated NCDs is higher among untreated individuals with HIV. In other parts of the
 world, and in cohorts composed mostly of individuals infected with HIV on effective
 antiretroviral treatment tested with comprehensive cognitive test batteries, the overall rates of
cognitive impairment were found to be around 25%–35%.
 In the United States, the incidence of HIV infection is higher in men than in women in every
 ethnic group. However, evidence supports a sex difference in NCD due to HIV infection, with
 more frequent neurocognitive impairment in women, including when sex is maintained as a risk
 factor in a multivariate analysis. The higher rate of impairment in women may be associated with
 differences in educational quality.
 Development and Course
 In the development and course of NCD due to HIV, individuals may have neurocognitive
 impairment when the HIV infection is asymptomatic; the Centers for Disease Control and
 Prevention classifies the underlying HIV infection in three stages: asymptomatic, early
 symptomatic, and late symptomatic/AIDS. The course of NCD due to HIV infection can resolve,
 improve, remain stable, slowly worsen, rapidly worsen, or have a fluctuating course. Rapid
 progression of neurocognitive impairment is uncommon in the context of currently available
 combination antiretroviral treatment, although it may still occur in the context of a subgroup
 associated with older age, as well as in association with specific comorbidities promoting
 cognitive impairment. Nevertheless, for the predominant proportion of individuals with HIV, an
 abrupt change in mental status warrants an evaluation of other medical sources for the cognitive
 change, including secondary infections. Because HIV infection preferentially affects subcortical
 regions over the course of illness, including deep white matter, the progression of the disorder
 follows a subcortical pattern. The subcortical pattern of cognitive impairment is characterized by
 mental slowing associated with motor dysfunction, procedural learning deficits, and free recall
 deficits, with relative sparing of recognition memory, verbal abstraction, and naming.
 Because HIV infection can affect a variety of brain regions and the illness can take on many
 different trajectories depending on associated comorbidities and the consequences of HIV
 infection, the overall course of an NCD due to HIV infection has considerable heterogeneity. A
 subcortical neurocognitive profile may interact with age over the life course, such that an
 interaction occurs between age and clinical stage of HIV disease in the domains of episodic
 memory and motor impairment (e.g., slowed gait). This interaction increases the overall
 prevalence of neurocognitive impairment and the likelihood that it will be more pronounced in
 later life.
 Acquisition of HIV infection typically occurs in adults in high-income countries, via high
risk behaviors (e.g., unprotected sex; injection substance use) beginning in late adolescence and
 peaking during young and middle adulthood, with a significant contribution persisting into older
 age. In lower-income regions, where HIV testing and antiretroviral treatments for pregnant
 women are not readily available, perinatal transmission is common. The NCD in such infants and
 children may manifest primarily as neurodevelopmental delay. As individuals treated for HIV
 survive into older age, additive and interactive neurocognitive effects of HIV and aging,
 including other NCDs (e.g., due to Alzheimer’s disease, due to Parkinson’s disease), are
 possible. More than 50% of individuals with HIV in the United States are older than 50 years.
 Long-term antiretroviral therapy is indicated for the ongoing control of HIV infection. However,
 some antiretroviral therapy may be associated with inflammation, neurotoxic effects, and
 metabolic changes that can lead to vascular compromise and indirectly increase neurocognitive
 impairment in conjunction with aging and medical comorbidities that may worsen cognition.
720
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Paradoxically, NCD due to HIV infection has not declined significantly with the advent of
 effective antiretroviral therapy, although the most severe presentations (consistent with the
 diagnosis of major NCD) have decreased sharply. Contributory factors may include inadequate
 control of HIV in the central nervous system (CNS), the evolution of antiretroviral drug-resistant
 viral strains, the effects of chronic long-term systemic and brain inflammation, and the effects of
 comorbid factors such as aging, substance use disorder, hypertension, diabetes, past history of
 CNS trauma, and co-infections, such as with the hepatitis C virus. Chronic exposure to
 antiretroviral drugs has also been associated with neurotoxicity in its own right.
 Diagnostic Markers
 An HIV diagnosis may be made from a test conducted on the blood, oral fluids, or urine. In
 addition, HIV characterization of the cerebrospinal fluid may be helpful if it reveals a
 disproportionately high viral load in the cerebrospinal fluid versus in the plasma or if there are
 indicators of a high level of neuroinflammation. Neuroimaging (e.g., magnetic resonance
 imaging [MRI]) may reveal reduction in total brain volume, cortical thinning, reduction in white
 matter volume, and patchy areas of abnormal white matter (hyperintensities). MRI of the brain or
 lumbar puncture may be helpful to exclude a specific medical condition (e.g., cryptococcal
 meningitis, meningoencephalitis, herpes simplex virus type 1 or type 2 encephalitis, progressive
 multifocal leukoencephalopathy) that might contribute to CNS changes in the context of AIDS.
 Specialized techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging may reveal damage to specific white
 matter tracts. Arterial spin-labeling (ASL) developed as a new type of MRI (ASL-MRI) may
 reveal regional changes in brain perfusion in 3–5 minutes without infusion of extrinsic tracers,
 and translocator protein 18-kDa (TSPO) positron emission tomography scanning may reveal
 neuroinflammation.
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to HIV Infection
 Functional consequences of major or mild NCD due to HIV infection are variable across
 individuals. Thus, impaired executive functions and slowed information processing may
 substantially interfere with adherence to the effective antiretroviral therapy regimens, although
 these regimens have been greatly simplified since their inception. Thus, functional status must be
 assessed and mapped directly to neurocognitive impairment in order to determine the severity of
 the NCD. Functional status related to neurocognitive impairment due to HIV should be separated
 from dysfunction attributable to other concomitant disorders that can affect neurocognitive
 function.
 Differential Diagnosis
 In the presence of comorbidities, such as other infections (e.g., hepatitis C virus, syphilis),
 substance use disorder (e.g., methamphetamine use disorder), prior traumatic brain injury, or
 neurodevelopmental conditions, major or mild NCD due to HIV infection can be diagnosed
provided there is evidence that infection with HIV has worsened any NCDs because of such
 preexisting or comorbid conditions. Among older adults, onset of neurocognitive decline related
 to cerebrovascular disease or primary neurodegeneration (e.g., major or mild NCD due to
 Alzheimer’s disease) may need to be differentiated; these conditions may be suggested by a
 relatively more progressive course of decline than is seen in NCD due to HIV. HIV infection
 itself has been shown to increase the risk of cerebrovascular disease. Because more severe
 immunodeficiency can result in opportunistic infections of the brain (e.g., toxoplasmosis;
 cryptococcosis) and neoplasia (e.g., CNS lymphoma), sudden
 721
 onset of an NCD or sudden worsening of an NCD demands active investigation of non-HIV
 etiologies. Delirium is important to consider because it occurs frequently over the disease course
 of individuals with HIV and may be due to multiple etiologies (including SARS-CoV-2 co
infection).
 Comorbidity
 HIV disease is accompanied by chronic systemic and CNS inflammation and diseases that can be
 associated with an NCD. These complications can be part of the pathogenesis of major or mild
 NCD as well as ANI due to HIV infection. HIV frequently co-occurs with conditions such as
 substance use disorders and other sexually transmitted infections. Both medical and psychiatric
 comorbidities have been identified that increase the likelihood of a diagnosis of NCD due to HIV
 infection. Women and members of underserved ethnic and racialized groups may show variation
 in the rates of the comorbidities associated with NCD due to HIV infection.