Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to
 Parkinson’s Disease
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. The disturbance occurs in the setting of established Parkinson’s disease.
 C. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment.
 D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
 is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 Major or mild neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease
 should be diagnosed if 1 and 2 are both met. Major or mild neurocognitive
 disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease should be diagnosed if 1 or 2 is
 met:
 1. There is no evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative
 or cerebrovascular disease or another neurological, mental, or systemic disease
 or condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
 2. The Parkinson’s disease clearly precedes the onset of the neurocognitive
 disorder.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to Parkinson’s disease,
 with behavioral disturbance, code first G20 Parkinson’s disease, followed by F02.81.
 For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to Parkinson’s disease,
 without behavioral disturbance, code first G20 Parkinson’s disease, followed by
 F02.80.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 724
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, code G31.84. (Note:
 Do not use the additional code for Parkinson’s disease. “With behavioral
 disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
 be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease: Use additional
 code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to Parkinson’s
disease (e.g., F06.0 psychotic disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, with
 hallucinations; F06.31 depressive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, with
 depressive features; F07.0 personality change due to traumatic brain injury,
 apathetic type).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of major or mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) due to Parkinson’s disease
 is cognitive decline observed at the time of or following the onset of idiopathic Parkinson’s
 disease. The disturbance must occur in the setting of established Parkinson’s disease (Criterion
 B), and deficits must have developed gradually (Criterion C). The rate of progression of
 cognitive deficits may vary; for some individuals with mild deficits there may be very minimal
 change over time.
 The NCD is viewed as probably due to Parkinson’s disease when there is no evidence of
 another disorder that might be responsible for the cognitive decline and when the Parkinson’s
 disease precedes onset of the NCD. The NCD is considered possibly due to Parkinson’s disease
 when only one of these conditions is met but not both conditions. A diagnosis of Parkinson’s
 disease prior to the onset of the cognitive change increases the diagnostic confidence that the
 NCD is attributable to Parkinson’s disease, as denoted by the probable designation.
 Associated Features
 Frequently present features include apathy, depressed mood, anxious mood, hallucinations,
 delusions, personality changes, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, excessive
 daytime sleepiness, freezing of gait, falls, bilateral involvement early in disease, postural
 instability and gait disturbance (PIGD) subtype, and hyposmia. The combination of postural and
 gait instability may occur early in the disease and may be described by the term PIGD subtype to
 distinguish from tremor-predominant Parkinson’s disease.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of Parkinson’s disease in the United States steadily increases with age from
 approximately 0.4% between ages 60 and 69 years to 1.4% between ages 80 and 89 years.
 Parkinson’s disease is more common in men than in women. Similarly, the prevalence of NCD
 due to Parkinson’s disease is higher in men than in women. However, it is not clear if the
 incidence of NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is higher in men than in women. Among
 individuals with Parkinson’s disease, as many as 80% will eventually develop a major NCD.
 Among those without a major NCD, the prevalence of mild NCD in Parkinson’s disease has been
 estimated at 25%–27%. For individuals with incident-untreated Parkinson’s disease, a range of
 9%–19% have mild NCD, whereas other studies have reported major NCD occurring in 24% of
 newly diagnosed untreated Parkinson’s disease. Among African Americans, the risk of
 Parkinson’s disease tends to be lower than among non-Latinx Whites, but the risk of dementia
 among those with the disease tends to be higher.
 Development and Course
 Onset of Parkinson’s disease is typically between ages 50 and 89 years, with most expression in
the early 60s. Mild NCD often develops relatively early in the course of Parkinson’s disease,
 whereas major impairment typically does not occur until individuals are older.
 725
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Risk factors for Parkinson’s disease include exposure to pesticides, solvents, and
 possibly traumatic brain injury.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Potential risk factors for NCD among individuals with Parkinson’s
 disease include older age at disease onset, increasing severity of disease, prominent gait
 symptoms, severe autonomic disturbance (particularly orthostatic hypotension), REM sleep
 behavior disorder, and possibly being a man and having fewer years of formal education.
 Individuals with Parkinson’s disease with glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) mutations and
 APOE*E4 genotype have been demonstrated to have worse cognition in cross-sectional and
 longitudinal research.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Guam dementia is a late-onset NCD observed among 8.8% of Chamorros (the indigenous
 population of Guam) age 65 years and older. Characterized by neurofibrillary tangles but without
 the amyloid plaques found in Alzheimer’s disease, it is thought to be possibly related to a unique
 parkinsonism-dementia complex and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. An association has been
 found with processing and eating fadang made with cycad seeds.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Neuropsychological testing, with a focus on tests that are not affected by motor slowing (i.e., not
 timed or requiring use of hands), is critical in detecting the core cognitive deficits, particularly at
 the mild NCD phase. Characteristic features observed in neuropsychological testing early in the
 disorder may include reduced attention, executive dysfunction, slowed information processing,
 and deficits in memory and visuospatial function, whereas many language skills may remain
 intact.
 Dopamine transporter scans, such as DaT scans, may differentiate Lewy body–related
 dementias (i.e., NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, NCD with Lewy bodies) from non–Lewy
 body–related dementias (e.g., NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease).
 Differential Diagnosis
 726
 Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies (NCDLB).
 The distinction between NCDLB
 and NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is based on the timing and sequence of motor symptoms
 and cognitive symptoms. Consensus criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies separate NCDLB
 from NCD due to Parkinson’s disease by specifying that for dementia to be attributed to
 Parkinson’s disease, the Parkinson’s disease diagnosis must be present for at least 1 year before
 cognitive decline has reached the level of major NCD, whereas for NCDLB, the cognitive
symptoms may begin before, with, or in the absence of parkinsonism. By contrast, expert
 consensus criteria for Parkinson’s disease propose that if cognitive decline occurs prior to a
 motor diagnosis, the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease may still be made; therefore, a clinician
 may attribute the cognitive decline to the Parkinson’s disease and diagnose NCD due to
 Parkinson’s disease. Consequently, the clinician may choose to diagnose NCD due to
 Parkinson’s disease or NCDLB for individuals with major NCD that starts either before or within
 12 months of Parkinson’s disease. In such circumstances, the clinician decides which diagnosis
 is more appropriate. If Parkinson’s disease has been diagnosed for at least 1 year prior to the
 onset of cognitive symptoms, then both expert criteria agree that NCD due to Parkinson’s disease
 would typically be the appropriate diagnosis. The timing and sequence of parkinsonism and mild
 NCD may be particularly difficult to determine, and unspecified NCD may need to be diagnosed
 until the order of clinical progression becomes evident.
 Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease.
 The motor features are the key to
 distinguishing major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease from major or mild NCD due to
 Alzheimer’s disease. However, the two disorders can co-occur, and individuals with well
established Alzheimer’s disease can develop mild parkinsonism.
 Major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder.
 Major or mild vascular NCD may manifest with
 parkinsonian features that may occur as a consequence of diffuse cortical or subcortical small
 vessel disease. However, the parkinsonian features typically are not sufficient for a diagnosis of
 Parkinson’s disease, and the course of the NCD usually has a clear association with
 cerebrovascular changes.
 Neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., neurodegenerative disorders).
 When 
a
 diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is being considered, the distinction
 must also be made from other brain disorders, such as progressive supranuclear palsy,
 corticobasal degeneration, multiple system atrophy, tumors, and hydrocephalus.
 Antipsychotic (or other dopamine receptor–blocking drug)–induced parkinsonism.
 Antipsychotic 
(or
 other dopamine receptor–blocking drug)–induced parkinsonism can occur in individuals with
 other NCDs, particularly when antipsychotic medications are prescribed for the behavioral
 manifestations of such disorders.
 Comorbidity
 Parkinson’s disease may coexist with Alzheimer’s disease and cerebrovascular disease,
 especially in older individuals. Individuals with NCD due to Parkinson’s disease may display
 clinical or biomarker features that suggest the presence of both Parkinson’s disease and other
 pathologies. Evidence for mixed etiology does not preclude the contribution of Parkinson’s
 disease to an NCD. The compounding of multiple pathological features may diminish the
 functional abilities of individuals with Parkinson’s disease. Motor symptoms and frequent co
occurrence of depression, psychosis, REM sleep behavior disorder, or apathy can make
 functional impairment worse.