 Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Prion
 Disease
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. There is insidious onset, and rapid progression of impairment is common.
 C. There are motor features of prion disease, such as myoclonus or ataxia, or
 biomarker evidence.
 D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
 is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, with behavioral disturbance,
 code first A81.9 prion disease, followed by F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder
 due to prion disease, with behavioral disturbance.
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, without behavioral
disturbance, code first A81.9 prion disease, followed by F02.80 major neurocognitive
 disorder due to prion disease, without behavioral disturbance.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, code G31.84. (Note: Do not
 use the additional code for prion disease. “With behavioral disturbance” and “without
 behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease: Use additional
 code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to prion disease
 (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to prion disease, with delusions; F06.32
 depressive disorder due to prion disease with major depressive–like episode).
 Diagnostic Features
 The classification of major or mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) due to prion disease includes
 NCDs due to a group of subacute spongiform encephalopathies (including sporadic Creutzfeldt
Jakob disease, genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, variant
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, variably protease-sensitive prionopathy,
 722
 kuru [found among the Fore people in Papua New Guinea], Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker
 syndrome, and fatal insomnia) caused by transmissible agents known as prions. Given that the
 most common type is sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, it is typically referred to as simply
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Variant CJD is much rarer and is associated with transmission
 of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, also called “mad cow disease.” Typically, individuals
 with CJD present with neurocognitive deficits, ataxia, and abnormal movements such as
 myoclonus, chorea, or dystonia; a startle reflex is also common. The history often reveals rapid
 progression to major NCD over as little as 6 months, and thus the disorder is typically seen only
 at the major level. However, many individuals with the disorder may have atypical presentations,
 and the disease can be confirmed only by biopsy or at autopsy. For example, individuals with
 variant CJD may present with a greater preponderance of psychiatric symptoms than do
 individuals with other types of prion disease, characterized by low mood, withdrawal, and
 anxiety. Although biomarker evidence is not necessarily required for the diagnosis if the motor
 features of prion disease (e.g., myoclonus, ataxia) are present, confidence that the NCD is due to
 prion disease is greatly increased if characteristic biomarkers are present.
 Prevalence
 Prevalence is unknown but very low given the short survival. Based on data from nine high
income countries, the annual incidence of sporadic CJD is approximately one or two cases per
 million people. Incidence varies by age and is highest in those age 65 years or older
 (4.8/1,000,000 individuals) and is higher in Whites compared with Blacks. Incidence among
 ethnic Chinese in Taiwan is lower than general population rates in the United States and other
 reporting countries.
Development and Course
 Prion disease may develop at any age in adults—the peak age for sporadic CJD is approximately
 67 years—although it has been reported to occur in individuals spanning the teenage years to late
 life. Non-Latinx Whites were found to have an older mean age at onset compared with other
 ethnic and racialized populations in the United States. Prodromal symptoms of prion disease may
 include fatigue, anxiety, problems with appetite or sleeping, or difficulties with concentration.
 After several weeks, these symptoms may be followed by incoordination, altered vision, or
 abnormal gait or other movements that may be myoclonic, choreoathetoid, or ballistic, along
 with a rapidly progressive dementia. The disease typically progresses very rapidly to the major
 level of impairment over several months. More rarely, it can progress over 2 years and appear
 similar in its course to other NCDs.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Cross-species transmission of prion infections, with agents that are closely related
 to the human form, has been demonstrated (e.g., the outbreak of bovine spongiform
 encephalopathy inducing variant CJD in the United Kingdom during the mid-1990s).
 Transmission by corneal transplantation, cadaveric dura mater grafts, contaminated neurosurgical
 instruments, cadaver-derived human growth hormone and pituitary gonadotropin injections, and
 blood transfusion (only in the case of variant CJD) has been documented. Studies have not
 demonstrated an increased risk of sporadic CJD in health care professionals.
 Genetic and physiological.
 In up to 15% of prion disease cases, there are autosomal dominant
 genetic mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP), which encodes for a normal neuronal
 membrane–bound protein. The codon 129 polymorphism of PRNP mediates the risk
 723
 of sporadic and acquired prion diseases as well as modifies clinical manifestation, age at disease
 onset, and disease duration.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Prion disease can be definitively confirmed only by brain biopsy or at autopsy. There are several
 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins that are markers of neuronal injury and are frequently elevated
 in prion disease; the ones most commonly used for diagnostic purposes are 14-3-3 and tau, which
 have high sensitivity but variable specificity. Real-time quaking induced conversion (RT-QuIC)
 is another CSF diagnostic test that is able to amplify minute amounts of disease-causing prion
 proteins and has extremely high specificity. Magnetic resonance brain imaging is currently
 considered the most sensitive diagnostic test when DWI (diffusion-weighted imaging) is
 performed, with the most common finding being multifocal gray matter hyperintensities in
 subcortical and/or cortical regions. In some individuals, the electroencephalogram reveals
 periodic sharp, often triphasic and synchronous discharges at a rate of 0.5–2 Hz at some point
 during the course of the disorder. It is important to note that the above diagnostic markers vary
 across prion disease type (e.g., sporadic CJD, genetic CJD, variant CJD).
Other major neurocognitive disorders.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Major NCD due to prion disease may appear similar in its
 course to other NCDs, but prion diseases are typically distinguished by their rapid progression
 and prominent cerebellar and motor symptoms.