Delirium
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift
 attention) accompanied by reduced awareness of the environment.
 B. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few
 days), represents a change from baseline attention and awareness, and tends to
 fluctuate in severity during the course of a day.
 C. An additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., memory deficit, disorientation,
 language, visuospatial ability, or perception).
 D. The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not better explained by another
 preexisting, established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in
 the context of a severely reduced level of arousal, such as coma.
 E. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is a direct physiological consequence of another medical
 condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal (i.e., due to a drug of abuse or to
 a medication), or exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.
Specify if:
 Acute: Lasting a few hours or days.
 Persistent: Lasting weeks or months.
 Specify if:
 Hyperactive: The individual has a hyperactive level of psychomotor activity that
 may be accompanied by mood lability, agitation, and/or refusal to cooperate with
 medical care.
 Hypoactive: The individual has a hypoactive level of psychomotor activity that
 may be accompanied by sluggishness and lethargy that approaches stupor.
 Mixed level of activity: The individual has a normal level of psychomotor
 activity even though attention and awareness are disturbed. Also includes
 individuals whose activity level rapidly fluctuates.
 Specify whether:
 Substance intoxication delirium: This diagnosis should be made instead of
 substance intoxication when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in
 the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
 attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance] intoxication
 delirium are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder
 present for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is
 comorbid with the substance intoxication delirium, the 4th position character is
 “1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the
 substance intoxication delirium (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine
 intoxication delirium”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is
 comorbid with the substance intoxication delirium, the 4th position character is
 “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or
 “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid
 substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g.,
 after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is
 “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance intoxication delirium.
 673
 ICD-10-CM
 Substance intoxication delirium
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use
 disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.121 F10.221 F10.921
 Cannabis F12.121 F12.221 F12.921
 Phencyclidine F16.121 F16.221 F16.921
 Other hallucinogen F16.121 F16.221 F16.921
Inhalant F18.121 F18.221 F18.921
 Opioid F11.121 F11.221 F11.921
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.121 F13.221 F13.921
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.121 F15.221 F15.921
 Cocaine F14.121 F14.221 F14.921
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.121 F19.221 F19.921
 Substance withdrawal delirium: This diagnosis should be made instead of
 substance withdrawal when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in the
 clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance] withdrawal
 delirium are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder
 present for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is
 comorbid with the substance withdrawal delirium, the 4th position character is
 “1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the
 substance withdrawal delirium (e.g., “mild alcohol use disorder with alcohol
 withdrawal delirium”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is
 comorbid with the substance withdrawal delirium, the 4th position character is
 “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or
 “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid
 substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g.,
 after regular use of an anxiolytic substance taken as prescribed), then the 4th
 position character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance
 withdrawal delirium.
 ICD-10-CM
 Substance withdrawal delirium
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use
 disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.131 F10.231 F10.931
 Opioid F11.188 F11.288 F11.988
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.131 F13.231 F13.931
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.131 F19.231 F19.931
 674
 Medication-induced delirium: This diagnosis applies when the symptoms in
 Criteria A and C arise as a side effect of a medication taken as prescribed.
 Code [specific medication]–induced delirium: F11.921 opioid taken as
 prescribed (or F11.988 if during withdrawal from opioid taken as prescribed);
 F12.921 pharmaceutical cannabis receptor agonist taken as prescribed;
 F13.921 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic taken as prescribed (or F13.931 if
during withdrawal from sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic taken as prescribed);
 F15.921 amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant taken as prescribed;
 F16.921 ketamine or other hallucinogen taken as prescribed or for medical
 reasons; F19.921 for medications that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g.,
 dexamethasone) and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
 etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown (or F19.931 if
 during withdrawal from medications that do not fit into any of the classes,
 taken as prescribed).
 F05 Delirium due to another medical condition: There is evidence from the
 history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is
 attributable to the physiological consequences of another medical condition.
 Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of
 the delirium (e.g., F05 delirium due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
 medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immediately
 before the delirium due to another medical condition (e.g., K72.90 hepatic
 encephalopathy; F05 delirium due to hepatic encephalopathy).
 F05 Delirium due to multiple etiologies: There is evidence from the history,
 physical examination, or laboratory findings that the delirium has more than one
 etiology (e.g., more than one etiological medical condition; another medical
 condition plus substance intoxication or medication side effect).
 Coding note: Use multiple separate codes reflecting specific delirium
 etiologies (e.g., K72.90 hepatic encephalopathy; F05 delirium due to hepatic
 failure; F10.231 alcohol withdrawal delirium). Note that the etiological medical
 condition both appears as a separate code that precedes the delirium code
 and is substituted into the delirium due to another medical condition rubric.
 Recording Procedures
 Substance intoxication delirium.
 The name of the substance intoxication delirium begins with the
 specific substance (e.g., cocaine) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The diagnostic
 code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and
 presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any
 of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases
 in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is
 unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
 When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
 listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance intoxication
 delirium, followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level
 of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in
 the case of acute hyperactive intoxication delirium occurring in a man with a severe cocaine use
 disorder, the diagnosis is F14.221 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine intoxication delirium,
 acute, hyperactive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not
 given. If the intoxication delirium occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a
 one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g.,
F16.921 phencyclidine intoxication delirium, acute, hypoactive).
 675
 Substance withdrawal delirium.
 The name of the substance withdrawal delirium begins with the
 specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the withdrawal delirium. The
 diagnostic code is selected from substance-specific codes in the coding note included in the
 criteria set. When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if
 any) is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the substance withdrawal delirium,
 followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of
 psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in the
 case of acute hyperactive withdrawal delirium occurring in a man with a severe alcohol use
 disorder, the diagnosis is F10.231 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal delirium,
 acute, hyperactive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given.
 Medication-induced delirium.
 The name of the medication-induced delirium begins with the
 specific substance (e.g., dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The name
 of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier
 indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity).
 For example, in the case of acute hyperactive medication-induced delirium occurring in a man
 using dexamethasone as prescribed, the diagnosis is F19.921 dexamethasone-induced delirium,
 acute, hyperactive.
 Specifiers
 Regarding course, in hospital settings, delirium usually lasts about 1 week, but some symptoms
 often persist even after individuals are discharged from the hospital.
 Individuals with delirium may rapidly switch between hyperactive and hypoactive states. The
 hyperactive state may be more common or more frequently recognized and often is associated
 with medication side effects and drug withdrawal. The hypoactive state may be more frequent in
 older adults and is often unrecognized among older individuals in emergency departments and
 hospitals.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of delirium is an acute impairment of consciousness characterized by a
 disturbance in attention accompanied by reduced awareness of the environment, both core
 features of normal consciousness. Because these deficits reflect an altered state of consciousness
 affecting many higher cerebral cortical functions of the cerebral cortex, they are accompanied by
 a change from baseline in other cognitive functions that cannot be better explained by a
 preexisting or evolving neurocognitive disorder (NCD). The disturbance in attention (Criterion
 A) is manifested by reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention. Questions must
 be repeated because the individual’s attention wanders, or the individual may perseverate with an
 answer to a previous question rather than appropriately shift attention. The individual is easily
 distracted by irrelevant stimuli. The disturbance in awareness affects both internal thinking and
 insight as well as difficulty making sense of what is happening in the external environment.
 The disturbance develops over a short period of time, usually hours to a few days, and tends
to fluctuate during the course of the day, often with worsening in the evening and night when
 external orienting stimuli decrease (Criterion B). There is evidence from the history, physical
 examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a physiological consequence of an
 underlying medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal, use of a medication, or a
 toxin exposure, or a combination of these factors (Criterion E). The etiology should be coded
 according to the etiologically appropriate subtype (i.e., substance or medication intoxication,
 substance withdrawal, another medical condition, or multiple etiologies). Delirium often occurs
 in the context of an underlying NCD. The impaired brain function of individuals with mild and
 major NCD renders them more vulnerable to developing a delirium.
 676
 There is an accompanying change in at least one other area that may include memory and
 learning (particularly recent memory), disorientation (particularly to time and place), alteration in
 language (particularly semantic comprehension), or perceptual distortion or a perceptual-motor
 disturbance (Criterion C). The perceptual disturbances accompanying delirium include
 misinterpretations, illusions, or hallucinations; these disturbances are typically visual, but may
 occur in other modalities as well, and range from simple and uniform to highly complex.
 Normal attention/arousal, delirium, and coma lie on a continuum. Coma is defined as a state
 of unconsciousness with an absence of cognition or sleep-wake cycle, along with the lack of any
 meaningful response to verbal or physical stimuli. Delirium is an impaired state of consciousness
 in the setting of an aroused cortex. The ability to evaluate cognition to diagnose delirium
 depends on there being a level of cortical arousal and wakefulness sufficient for response to
 verbal stimulation; hence, delirium should not be diagnosed in the context of coma (Criterion D).
 Stuporous individuals also have a reduced level of brain arousal, but not to the extent of the
 complete unconsciousness of coma. Coma and stupor can be due to neurological conditions or
 drug-induced as with iatrogenic deep sedation in intensive care unit (ICU) settings or general
 anesthesia. Those individuals who show only minimal responses to verbal or physical
 stimulation are incapable of engaging with attempts at standardized testing or even interview.
 This inability to engage should be classified as a disorder of arousal such as coma or stupor, and
 not as delirium. However, delirium can be a stage that follows emergence from coma or stupor,
 especially when coma is the result of a neurological condition. Further, the sleep-wake cycle
 disturbance characteristic of the circadian rhythm disturbance in delirium can interfere with full
 assessment of the individual if in a sleep phase, which should be distinguished from a disorder of
 brain arousal.
 Associated Features
 Delirium is often associated with a disturbance in the sleep-wake cycle. This disturbance can
 include daytime sleepiness, nighttime agitation, difficulty falling asleep, excessive sleepiness
 throughout the day, or wakefulness throughout the night. In some cases, complete reversal of the
 night-day sleep-wake cycle can occur. Sleep-wake cycle disturbances are very common in
 delirium and have been proposed as a core criterion for the diagnosis.
 The individual with delirium may exhibit emotional disturbances, such as anxiety, fear,
 depression, irritability, anger, euphoria, and apathy. There may be rapid and unpredictable shifts
from one emotional state to another. The disturbed emotional state may also be evident in calling
 out, screaming, cursing, muttering, moaning, or making other sounds. These behaviors are
 especially prevalent at night and under conditions in which stimulation and environmental cues
 are lacking.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of delirium is highest among hospitalized older individuals and varies depending
 on the individuals’ characteristics, setting of care, and sensitivity of the detection method. Data
 from the United States and Finland indicate that the prevalence of delirium in the community
 overall is low (1%–2%). The prevalence is 8%–17% in older individuals presenting to North
 American emergency departments, where the delirium often indicates a medical illness.
 Based on data from various countries, the prevalence of delirium when individuals are
 admitted to the hospital ranges from 18% to 35%, and estimates of the occurrence of delirium
 arising during hospitalization range from 29% to 64% in general hospital populations.
 Internationally, delirium occurs in 11%–51% of older individuals postoperatively and in up to
 81% of those in intensive care. The prevalence of delirium ranges from 20% to 22% in
 individuals in nursing homes or post–acute care settings and occurs in up to 88% of individuals
 with terminal illness at the end of life. Despite having higher risk factors for delirium, such as
 cardiovascular disease, sepsis, and respiratory failure, younger African Americans
 677
 tended to have lower rates of the occurrence of delirium compared with White individuals of
 similar age in a large case series of ICU patients in the United States.
 Development and Course
 The majority of individuals with delirium have a full recovery with or without treatment,
 especially those who are not elderly. Delirium may progress to stupor, coma, seizures, or death,
 particularly if undetected and the underlying cause(s) remains untreated.
 There is increasing evidence that delirium may be associated in long-term follow-up with
 cognitive decline or major NCD in the elderly, particularly in those with preexisting underlying
 cognitive impairment. Mortality among hospitalized individuals with delirium is high; as many
 as 38%–41% of individuals with delirium die within 1 year after diagnosis; the risk of death is
 particularly great among those with malignancies and other significant underlying medical
 illness.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Delirium may be increased in the context of functional impairment, preexisting cognitive
 impairment, sensory impairment (e.g., vision/hearing), increasing age, illness severity or
 comorbidity, infection, depression, history of stroke, and history of alcohol use. Both major and
 mild NCDs can increase the risk for delirium and complicate the course. Falls may be an
 outcome of delirium but are not found to be a risk factor. In a meta-analysis of studies from 1990
 through 2016, anticholinergic use was not a validated predictor of delirium.
 Older individuals are especially susceptible to delirium compared with younger adults.
Among children, susceptibility to delirium in infancy and through childhood may be associated
 with significant childhood morbidity and mortality, whereas individuals in early adulthood
 through mid-adulthood may have less susceptibility to delirium and lower mortality risk.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The symptoms associated with delirium may vary in men and women. Men more commonly
 manifest motor agitation and affective lability, whereas women more commonly manifest
 hypoactive delirium. Male sex is a risk factor for delirium, and sex- or gender-related factors
 may interact with other risk factors.
 Diagnostic Markers
 In addition to laboratory findings characteristic of underlying medical conditions (or intoxication
 or withdrawal states), there is often generalized irregular theta slowing on
 electroencephalography, and fast activity is occasionally found (e.g., in some cases of alcohol
 withdrawal delirium). However, electroencephalography is unable to detect slowing associated
 with delirium without comparison to premorbid baseline alpha rhythms unless the slowing is in
 the abnormal theta or delta frequency range.
 Functional Consequences of Delirium
 Delirium itself is associated with increased functional decline and risk of institutional placement.
 Hospitalized individuals 65 years or older with delirium are at greater risk for poor outcomes
 following discharge, including mortality, institutionalization, and dementia.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Psychotic disorders and bipolar and depressive disorders with psychotic features.
 Delirium 
that 
is
 characterized by vivid hallucinations, delusions, language disturbances, and agitation must be
 distinguished from brief psychotic disorder, schizophrenia,
 678
 schizophreniform disorder, and other psychotic disorders, as well as from manic or major
 depressive episodes, with psychotic features.
 Acute stress disorder.
 Delirium associated with fear, anxiety, and dissociative symptoms, such as
 depersonalization, must be distinguished from acute stress disorder, which is precipitated by
 exposure to a severely traumatic event.
 Malingering and factitious disorder.
 Delirium can be distinguished from these disorders on the basis
 of the often atypical symptomatic presentation in malingering and factitious disorder and the
 absence of another medical condition or substance that is etiologically related to the apparent
 cognitive disturbance.
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 The most common differential diagnostic issue when evaluating
 confusion in older adults is disentangling symptoms of delirium and major NCD. The clinician
 must determine whether the individual has delirium; a delirium superimposed on a preexisting
 NCD, such as that due to Alzheimer’s disease; or an NCD without delirium. The traditional
distinction between delirium and major NCD according to acuteness of onset and temporal
 course is particularly difficult in those elderly individuals who had a prior NCD that may not
 have been recognized, or who developed persistent cognitive impairment following an episode of
 delirium. When delirium and major NCD are comorbid, the management of the delirium should
 generally be given priority.