 Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. The clinical features are consistent with a vascular etiology, as suggested by
 either of the following:
 1. Onset of the cognitive deficits is temporally related to one or more
 cerebrovascular events.
 2. Evidence for decline is prominent in complex attention (including processing
 speed) and frontal-executive function.
 703
 C. There is evidence of the presence of cerebrovascular disease from history,
 physical examination, and/or neuroimaging considered sufficient to account for
 the neurocognitive deficits.
 D. The symptoms are not better explained by another brain disease or systemic
 disorder.
 Probable vascular neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if one of the following is
 present; otherwise possible vascular neurocognitive disorder should be
 diagnosed:
1. Clinical criteria are supported by neuroimaging evidence of significant
 parenchymal injury attributed to cerebrovascular disease (neuroimaging
supported).
 2. The neurocognitive syndrome is temporally related to one or more documented
 cerebrovascular events.
 3. Both clinical and genetic (e.g., cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
 subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) evidence of cerebrovascular
 disease is present.
 Possible vascular neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if the clinical criteria are
 met but neuroimaging is not available and the temporal relationship of the
 neurocognitive syndrome with one or more cerebrovascular events is not
 established.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to vascular disease, with
 behavioral disturbance, code F01.51.
 For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to vascular disease,
 without behavioral disturbance, code F01.50.
 An additional medical code for the vascular disease is not used.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 For mild vascular neurocognitive disorder, code G31.84. (Note: Do not use an
 additional code for the vascular disease. “With behavioral disturbance” and “without
 behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
 For major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder: Use additional code(s) to
 indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to the cerebrovascular
 disease (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to cerebrovascular disease, with
 depressive features).
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnosis of major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder (NCD) requires the
 establishment of an NCD (Criterion A) and the determination that cerebrovascular disease is the
 dominant if not exclusive pathology that accounts for the cognitive deficits (Criteria B and C).
 Vascular etiology may range from large vessel stroke to microvascular disease; the presentation
 is therefore very heterogeneous, stemming from the types of vascular lesions and their extent and
 location. The lesions may be focal, multifocal, or diffuse and occur in various combinations.
 Pathogenic mechanisms responsible for brain parenchymal injury include hypoperfusion and
 hypoxia, oxidative stress and inflammation leading to endothelial dysfunction, impairment of
 autoregulation, and disruption of neurovascular coupling.
 Many individuals with major or mild vascular NCD present with multiple infarctions, with an
 acute stepwise or fluctuating decline in cognition, and intervening periods of stability and even
 some improvement. Others may have gradual onset with slow progression, a rapid development
 of deficits followed by relative stability, or another complex presentation. Major or mild vascular
NCD with a gradual onset and slow progression is generally attributable to small vessel disease
 leading to lesions in the white matter, basal ganglia, or thalamus. The gradual progression in
 these cases is often punctuated by acute
 704
 events that leave subtle neurological deficits. The cognitive deficits in these cases can be
 attributed to disruption of cortical-subcortical circuits; complex attention, particularly speed of
 information processing, and executive function are likely to be affected. Clinical subtypes of
 vascular NCD have been described and include 1) poststroke NCD, manifesting immediately
 after a stroke; 2) subcortical ischemic vascular NCD; 3) multi-infarct (cortical) NCD; and 4)
 cortical-subcortical vascular NCD.
 Assessing for the presence of sufficient cerebrovascular disease relies on history, physical
 examination, and neuroimaging (Criterion C). Etiological certainty requires the demonstration of
 abnormalities on neuroimaging. The lack of neuroimaging can result in significant diagnostic
 inaccuracy by overlooking “silent” brain infarction and white matter lesions. However, if the
 neurocognitive impairment is temporally associated with one or more well-documented strokes,
 a probable diagnosis can be made in the absence of neuroimaging. Clinical evidence of
 cerebrovascular disease includes documented history of stroke, with cognitive decline temporally
 associated with the event, or physical signs consistent with stroke (e.g., hemiparesis;
 pseudobulbar syndrome, visual field defect). Neuroimaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]
 or computed tomography [CT]) evidence of cerebrovascular disease comprises one or more of
 the following: one or more large vessel infarcts or hemorrhages, a strategically placed single
 infarct or hemorrhage (e.g., in angular gyrus, thalamus, basal forebrain), two or more lacunes
 outside the brain stem, or extensive and confluent white matter lesions. The latter is often termed
 small vessel disease or subcortical ischemic changes on clinical neuroimaging evaluations. MRI
 is the preferred mode of neuroimaging, and there has been interest in using specialized MRI
 techniques to detect cerebral microbleeds, cortical microinfarcts, dilated perivascular spaces, and
 diffusion-based analyses of white matter tracts and network connectivity.
 For mild vascular NCD, history of a single stroke or extensive white matter disease is
 generally sufficient. For major vascular NCD, two or more strokes, a strategically placed stroke,
 or a combination of white matter disease and one or more lacunes is generally necessary.
 However, the relationship between identifiable vascular pathology in the brain on neuroimaging
 and the cognitive symptoms is imperfect, and clinical judgment is generally needed to relate the
 vascular lesions to the cognitive syndrome.
 The neurocognitive symptoms must not be better explained by another medical condition or
 mental disorder. For example, prominent memory deficit early in the course might suggest NCD
 due to Alzheimer’s disease, early and prominent parkinsonian features would suggest NCD due
 to Parkinson’s disease, and a close association between onset of cognitive and depressive
 symptoms would suggest cognitive impairment as a result of depression.
 A number of expert international groups have similarly defined and categorized the vascular
 NCDs, with which DSM-5 criteria generally display good correspondence.
 Associated Features
A neurological assessment often reveals history of stroke or transient ischemic episodes, and
 signs indicative of brain infarctions. Also commonly associated are personality and mood
 changes, abulia, depression, and emotional lability. The development of late-onset depressive
 symptoms accompanied by psychomotor slowing and executive dysfunction is a common
 presentation among older adults with progressive small vessel ischemic disease (so-called
 vascular depression).
 Prevalence
 Vascular disease is the second most common cause of NCD after Alzheimer’s disease. In the
 United States, population prevalence estimates for vascular dementia are 0.98% for individuals
 ages 71–79 years, 4.09% for those ages 80–89 years, and 6.19% for those age 90 years or older.
 Within 3 months following stroke, 20%–30% of individuals are diagnosed with
 705
 dementia. In a European autopsy series of decedents ages 60–103 years, the prevalence of pure
 vascular dementia was 12.3%. Among those ages 60–69 years, the prevalence was higher
 (15.0%) compared with those older than 90 years (8.7%). Mixed dementia (Alzheimer’s plus
 vascular pathology) was present in 5.5% of the overall cohort, with a higher prevalence in those
 older than 90 years (10.6%) compared with those ages 60–69 years (5.2%). Higher prevalence of
 vascular dementia has been found among African Americans, Mexican Americans, and South
 Asian Americans compared with non-Latinx Whites, possibly because of higher rates of risk
 factors such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease. In Japan and several other Asian countries,
 the prevalence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease has increased over time relative to
 vascular dementia. Currently, the prevalence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease among
 Japanese Americans is 2.6 times higher than that of vascular dementia.
 Stroke is more common in men through age 65 years, but more common in women after age
 65 years. Overall, the rate of vascular NCD was higher in men in some studies.
 Development and Course
 Major or mild vascular NCD can occur at any age, although the prevalence increases
 exponentially after age 65 years. In older individuals, additional pathologies are almost always
 present and partly account for the neurocognitive deficits. The course may vary from acute onset
 with partial improvement to stepwise decline to progressive decline, with fluctuations and
 plateaus of varying durations. Pure subcortical major or mild vascular NCD can have a slowly
 progressive course that simulates major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease. The risk of an
 ischemic stroke progressing to vascular NCD within 5 years was almost twice as high among
 African Americans as among non-Latinx Whites in the United States and occurred at younger
 ages. This is possibly a result of the impact of higher rates of hypertension, diabetes, and adverse
 social determinants of mental health known to worsen dementia risk, such as limited formal
 education and low socioeconomic status.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 The neurocognitive outcomes of vascular brain injury are influenced by
Genetic and physiological.
 neuroplasticity factors such as education, physical exercise, and mental activity.
 The major risk factors for major or mild vascular NCD are the same as
 those for cerebrovascular disease and stroke, including hypertension, diabetes, smoking, obesity,
 high cholesterol levels, high homocysteine levels, other risk factors for atherosclerosis and
 arteriolosclerosis, atrial fibrillation, and other conditions increasing the risk of cerebral emboli.
 Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, leading to cerebral hemorrhage, is an important risk factor in
 which amyloid deposits occur within arterial vessels. A genetic risk factor is the hereditary
 condition cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
 leukoencephalopathy, or CADASIL. Other rarer forms of genetic disorders linked to vascular
 NCD exist, but overall the contribution of genetics is small.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Structural neuroimaging, using MRI or CT, has an important role in the diagnostic process.
 There are no other established biomarkers of major or mild vascular NCD.
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive
 Disorder
 Major or mild vascular NCD is commonly associated with physical deficits that cause additional
 disability.
 706
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Since incidental brain infarctions and white matter lesions are
 common in older individuals, it is important to consider other possible etiologies when an NCD
 is present in an individual with white matter lesions. A history of memory deficit early in the
 course, and progressive worsening of memory, language, executive function, and perceptual
motor abilities in the absence of corresponding focal lesions on brain imaging, are suggestive of
 Alzheimer’s disease as the primary diagnosis. Potential biomarkers currently being validated for
 Alzheimer’s disease, such as cerebrospinal fluid levels of β-amyloid and phosphorylated tau, and
 amyloid and tau imaging, may prove to be helpful in the differential diagnosis. NCD with Lewy
 bodies is distinguished from major or mild vascular NCD by its core features of fluctuating
 cognition, visual hallucinations, and spontaneous parkinsonism. While deficits in executive
 function and language occur in major or mild vascular NCD, the insidious onset and gradual
 progression of behavioral features or language impairment are characteristic of frontotemporal
 NCD and are not typical of vascular etiology.
 Other medical conditions.
 A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is not made if other
 diseases (e.g., brain tumor, multiple sclerosis, encephalitis, toxic or metabolic disorders) are
 present and are of sufficient severity to account for the cognitive impairment.
 Other mental disorders.
 A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is inappropriate if the
 symptoms can be entirely attributed to delirium, although delirium may sometimes be
 superimposed on a preexisting major or mild vascular NCD, in which case both diagnoses can be
 made. If the criteria for major depressive disorder are met and the cognitive impairment is
temporally related to the likely onset of the depression, major or mild vascular NCD should not
 be diagnosed. However, if the NCD preceded the development of the depression, or the severity
 of the cognitive impairment is out of proportion to the severity of the depression, depressive
 disorder due to cerebrovascular disease should be diagnosed instead of major depressive
 disorder.
 Comorbidity
 Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease commonly co-occurs with major or mild
 vascular NCD, in which case both diagnoses should be made. Major or mild vascular NCD and
 depression frequently co-occur.