Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Traumatic
 Brain Injury
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. There is evidence of a traumatic brain injury—that is, an impact to the head or
 other mechanisms of rapid movement or displacement of the brain within the
 skull, with one or more of the following:
 1. Loss of consciousness.
 2. Posttraumatic amnesia.
 3. Disorientation and confusion.
 4. Neurological signs (e.g., neuroimaging demonstrating injury; visual field cuts;
 anosmia; hemiparesis; hemisensory loss; cortical blindness; aphasia; apraxia;
 weakness;
 707
 loss of balance; other sensory loss that cannot be accounted for by peripheral
 or other causes).
 C. The neurocognitive disorder presents immediately after the occurrence of the
 traumatic brain injury or immediately after recovery of consciousness and
 persists past the acute post-injury period.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with behavioral
 disturbance: code first S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of
 consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela; followed by F02.81 major
 neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with behavioral disturbance.
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, without behavioral
disturbance: code first S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of
 consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela; followed by F02.80 major
 neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, without behavioral disturbance.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, code G31.84. (Note:
 Do not use the additional code for traumatic brain injury. “With behavioral
 disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
 be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury: Use
 additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to the
 traumatic brain injury (e.g., F06.34 bipolar and related disorder due to traumatic
 brain injury, with mixed features; F07.0 personality change due to traumatic brain
 injury, apathetic type).
 Specifiers
 Rate the severity of the neurocognitive disorder (NCD), not the underlying traumatic brain injury
 (see the section “Development and Course” for this disorder).
 Diagnostic Features
 Major or mild NCD due to traumatic brain injury (TBI) denotes an acquired and persistent
 disorder of cognition resulting from a traumatic brain injury. Traumatic brain injury is defined as
 disruption of brain structure and/or function resulting from the application of biomechanical
 forces (including acceleration/deceleration forces and blast-related forces), as manifested
 immediately by one or more of the following clinical signs: loss of consciousness, loss of
 memory for events immediately before or after the injury (posttraumatic amnesia), alteration in
 mental state (e.g., confusion, disorientation, slowed thinking), or focal neurological signs (e.g.,
 hemiparesis, hemisensory loss, cortical blindness, aphasia, apraxia, weakness, loss of balance,
 other sensory loss that cannot be accounted for by peripheral or other causes) (Criterion B).
 These manifestations of TBI must not be due to alcohol or other drugs or medications, other
 injuries or treatment(s) for other injuries (e.g., facial injuries, intubation, or bodily/systemic
 injuries), or psychological trauma, language barrier, or coexisting medical conditions.
 The severity of a TBI is classified as mild, complicated mild, moderate, or severe according
 to the thresholds in Table 2. An individual whose injury phenomenologically meets criteria for
 mild TBI but whose computed tomographic or magnetic resonance imaging in the acute period
 after TBI reveals traumatic intracranial abnormalities (i.e., traumatic epidural or subdural
 hematoma, subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral contusions or laceration) is
 classified as complicated mild TBI. Outcomes of individuals with complicated mild TBI are
 more like those with moderate TBI than those with uncomplicated mild TBI.
 708
 TABLE 2 Classification of traumatic brain injury (TBI) severity
TBI severity
 Mild TBI
 Complicated
 mild TBI
 Moderate TBI Severe TBI
 Loss of consciousness duration
 Posttraumatic amnesia duration (densely
 impaired new learning)
 Alteration of consciousness duration (e.g.,
 confusion, disorientation, slowed thinking)
 Glasgow Coma Scale score (30 minutes after
 the event)
 Computed tomography or magnetic
 resonance imaging of the brain
 ≤ 30 minutes
 ≤ 1 day
 ≤ 1 day
 13–15
 Normal
 ≤ 30 minutes
 ≤ 1 day
 ≤ 1 day
 13–15
 Abnormal
 > 30 minutes to
 < 24 hours
 > 1 day to < 7
 days
 > 1 day to < 7
 days
 9–12
 Normal or
 abnormal
 ≥ 24 hours
 ≥ 7 days
 ≥ 7 days
 3–8
 Normal or
 abnormal
 To be attributable to TBI, the NCD must manifest either immediately after the brain injury
 occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness after the injury, and persist
 past the acute postinjury period (Criterion C).
 While the specific cognitive impairments associated with major or mild NCD due to TBI are
 variable, impairments in complex attention, processing speed, learning and memory, and
 executive function are common, as are disturbances in social cognition. In more severe TBI in
 which there is brain contusion, intracranial hemorrhage, or penetrating injury, there may be
 additional neurocognitive impairments associated with the affected region of the brain and the
 volume of brain tissue lost (e.g., aphasia, apraxia, disturbances in perceptual-motor function).
 Associated Features
 The diagnosis may also be supported by subtle neurological signs (e.g., multiple primitive
 reflexes such as glabellar sign, snout response, palmomental reflex) or deficits in saccades and
 smooth-pursuit eye movements co-occurring with frontally mediated cognitive impairments such
 as complex attention problems, slow processing speed, impaired memory retrieval, or executive
 dysfunction. Particularly in some cases of penetrating TBI, the diagnosis of NCD due to TBI
 may be supported by posttraumatic epilepsy with focal onset in a location that corresponds to the
 anatomy of a cognitive domain in which an individual demonstrates impairment (e.g., medial
 temporal lobe–onset seizures and episodic memory impairment; frontal lobe seizures and
 executive dysfunction or social cognitive impairment).
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of major and mild NCD due to TBI varies with injury severity and time since
 injury, with the highest frequencies among individuals with more severe injury and during the
 acute/subacute post-injury period. In the United States, more than 2.87 million TBIs occur
 annually, including more than 837,000 TBIs in children. These TBIs account for 2.5 million
 emergency department visits, 288,000 hospitalizations, and more than 56,000
 709
 deaths annually. Among individuals presenting to an emergency department with TBI, the rates
 for men are 547.6 per 100,000 and for women are 385.9 per 100,000. The TBI rate is higher for
 men than women in every age group up to age 75 years, after which the rates of TBI between
men and women approach parity. The leading causes of TBI in the United States are falls (178.4
 per 100,000), collision with a moving or stationary object (termed “struck by/against” events)
 (92.7 per 100,000), motor vehicle crashes (74.7 per 100,000), and assaults (50.6 per 100,000
 persons). Concussion in sport is increasingly recognized as a cause of mild TBI.
 Men are approximately 40% more likely to experience a TBI compared with women in the
 young and adult populations; however, women may have higher risk of TBI after age 65 years. It
 has been suggested that men with moderate or severe TBI may have a worse prognosis than
 women with the same level of severity; however, the findings have been mixed. The cause of
 TBI also differs by sex and gender. Men are more likely to experience injuries at work, in motor
 vehicle accidents, and during military activities, whereas women are more likely to experience
 injuries from assault and domestic violence.
 Development and Course
 The course of recovery from TBI is variable, depending not only on the specifics of the injury
 but also on pre-injury and postinjury factors. These factors may favor or impede recovery and
 include age; prior history of TBI; neurological, psychiatric, and substance use comorbidities and
 complications; genetics; the timeliness and effectiveness of medical and rehabilitative
 interventions; and psychosocial support, among others.
 Neurocognitive impairments are most severe in the acute period following the TBI and may
 be accompanied by disturbances of emotion and behavior. Across the spectrum of TBI severity,
 substantial improvement in neurocognitive and associated psychiatric and neurological
 symptoms and signs is expected. The extent of recovery and the variability in neurocognitive
 outcomes tend to reflect the severity of TBI, with complete recovery being typical after mild TBI
 and more variable, and often incomplete, recovery following more severe TBI.
 Neurocognitive impairments associated with mild TBI typically resolve within days to weeks
 after the injury, with complete resolution within 3–12 months post-injury. Other symptoms (e.g.,
 depression, irritability, fatigue, headache, photosensitivity, sleep disturbance) that may
 potentially co-occur with the neurocognitive symptoms also tend to resolve in the weeks
 following mild TBI. Persistent symptoms after mild TBI or subsequent neurocognitive
 deterioration should trigger consideration of other potential causes of neurocognitive symptoms
 and functional limitations, including major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder
 (PTSD), anxiety disorders, substance use disorders, sleep disturbances, negative injury
 perceptions, and poor expectations for recovery. When neurocognitive symptoms and functional
 limitations persist after mild TBI (including repetitive mild TBI) despite treatment of their other
 potential causes, diagnosis of an NCD due to TBI may be appropriate.
 Neurocognitive impairments and associated functional limitations produced by moderate and
 severe TBI typically improve over weeks to months after the injury, although long-term
 neurocognitive recovery is often incomplete among individuals with more severe injuries.
 Nonetheless, neurocognitive and functional improvement may continue for years after moderate
 or severe TBI, with more individuals cognitively improving than declining during the first 5
 years postinjury. With moderate and severe TBI, in addition to persistence of neurocognitive
 deficits, there may be associated neurological, medical, emotional, and behavioral complications.
 These include seizures (particularly in the first year), photosensitivity, hyperacusis, irritability,
 aggression, depression, sleep disturbance, fatigue, apathy, inability to resume occupational and
social functioning at preinjury level, and deterioration in interpersonal relationships. Moderate
 and severe TBI have been
 710
 associated with increased risk of depression, aggression, and possibly neurodegenerative
 diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, Lewy body disease, and frontotemporal degeneration.
 The features of persisting major or mild NCD due to TBI will vary by age, specifics of the
 injury, and cofactors. Persisting TBI-related impairment in an infant or child may be reflected in
 delays in reaching developmental milestones (e.g., language acquisition), worse academic
 performance, and possibly impaired social development. Among older teenagers and adults,
 persisting symptoms may include various neurocognitive deficits, irritability, hypersensitivity to
 light and sound, easy fatigability, and mood changes, including depression, anxiety, hostility, or
 apathy. In older individuals, mild TBI may produce neurocognitive outcomes like those
 associated with moderate or severe TBI in younger adults.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Risk factors for adverse cognitive outcomes after TBI include age older than 40 years, lower pre
injury cognitive abilities (especially as indexed by education or academic competence), preinjury
 depressive symptoms, possibly pre-injury unemployment, and injury severity. Other risk factors
 for adverse cognitive outcomes include a longer duration of posttraumatic amnesia, evidence of
 traumatic intracranial abnormalities on early computed tomography or magnetic resonance
 imaging (MRI) studies (i.e., traumatic epidural or subdural hematoma, subarachnoid or
 intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral contusions or laceration, diffuse axonal injury) and
 neurogenetic profile (e.g., APOE*E4 allele carrier status, catechol-O-methyltransferase
 genotype, ANKK1 Taq1A allele status). Pre-injury alcohol or substance use disorders increase
 the risk of sustaining a TBI as well as the risk of adverse cognitive outcomes, including memory
 impairment and executive dysfunction.
 Diagnostic Markers
 The diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to TBI may be supported by contemporaneous
 computed tomographic or MRI findings (e.g., focal atrophy, encephalomalacia, gliosis, white
 matter abormalities) in brain areas or networks subserving specific cognitive domains in which
 an individual demonstrates impairment. The diagnosis may also be supported by subtle
 neurological signs (e.g., multiple primitive reflexes such as glabellar sign, snout response,
 palmomental reflex) or deficits in saccades and smooth-pursuit eye movements co-occurring
 with frontally mediated cognitive impairments such as complex attention problems, slow
 processing speed, impaired memory retrieval, or executive dysfunction. Particularly in some
 cases of penetrating TBI, the diagnosis of NCD due to TBI may be supported by posttraumatic
 epilepsy with focal onset in a location that corresponds to the anatomy of a cognitive domain in
 which an individual demonstrates impairment (e.g., medial temporal lobe–onset seizures and
 episodic memory impairment; frontal lobe seizures and executive dysfunction or social cognitive
 impairment).
 Performance on commonly used general cognitive screening measures, particularly when
interpreted using large-scale, population-based normative data, may usefully identify individuals
 in need of further neurodiagnostic assessment. However, the diagnosis of major or mild NCD
 due to TBI rests on performance on domain-specific cognitive assessment interpreted in light of
 the individual’s prior performance (e.g., neuropsychological estimates of pre-injury cognitive
 ability or appropriate norms) and assessment of functional status.
 While neuroimaging and other clinical assessments (e.g., subtle neurological signs) may
 provide supportive information, they cannot independently diagnose NCD due to TBI. At
 present, there are no other established biomarkers of major or mild NCD due to TBI.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Individuals with TBI, including moderate or severe TBI, are at increased long-term risk for
 suicide. While depression is a substantial contributor to this risk, it does not fully account for it.
 Rates of suicidal ideation are as high as 10%, and rates of suicide attempt are 0.8%–1.7%
 711
 over the first 20 years after TBI. The development of depression and/or suicidal behavior at 1
year post-injury is associated with consistently elevated rates of depression and suicidal behavior
 5 years after TBI. While the relationship between cognitive impairments and suicide risk after
 TBI is complex, assessing suicide risk is an important element in the evaluation of individuals
 with major or mild NCD due to TBI.
 Youth who have had concussions may be at higher risk for suicidal behavior. There is an
 increased risk of suicide among both veteran and civilian cohorts with TBI, and individuals
 seeking mental health care may have a history of TBI. Individuals seeking rehabilitative services
 for TBI are also at heightened risk for suicidal thoughts and behavior.
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Traumatic Brain Injury
 Approximately 3.17 million individuals in the United States (approximately 1.1% of the
 population) live with a TBI-related disability, including neurocognitive impairments that
 compromise the ability to work or perform daily activities and that are associated with the need
 for ongoing medical care, rehabilitation, support, and services. Cognitive impairments interfere
 with functional independence, productive employment, and community participation and may
 reduce satisfaction with life. The influence of cognitive impairments on functional status varies
 with the type and severity of those impairments; with the presence and severity of co-occurring
 psychiatric, substance use, neurological, and medical conditions; and with family, other
 psychosocial, and medical support.
 With mild NCD due to TBI, individuals may report reduced cognitive efficiency, difficulty
 concentrating, and lessened ability to perform usual activities. With major NCD due to TBI, an
 individual may have difficulty in independent living and self-care. Prominent neuromotor
 features, such as severe incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing, may be present in major NCD
 due to TBI and may add to functional difficulties.
 Individuals with TBI histories report more depressive and anxious symptoms, and these can
 amplify cognitive complaints and worsen functional outcome. Additionally, loss of emotional
control, including aggressive or inappropriate affect and apathy, may be present after more
 severe TBI with greater neurocognitive impairment. These features may compound difficulties
 with functional independence and self-care.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 Mental disorders (e.g., major depressive disorder,
 anxiety disorders, PTSD, alcohol and other substance use disorders, sleep disturbances),
 prescribed medications (e.g., typical antipsychotics, benzodiazepines, drugs with anticholinergic
 properties, antiepileptic drugs), and other medical conditions may contribute to or account for
 cognitive impairments among individuals with TBI, and need to be considered in the differential
 diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to TBI.
 Factitious disorder and malingering.
 Alternative explanations for neurocognitive symptoms should
 be considered when the severity of neurocognitive symptoms and functional limitations are
 inconsistent with the cognitive outcomes expected after TBI—and particularly mild TBI—and
 when neuropsychological assessment reveals poor effort or is otherwise not valid for
 interpretation. In such circumstances, the possibility of factitious disorder or malingering
 (especially in situations in which there might be external incentives such as obtaining financial
 compensation) should be considered.
 Comorbidity
 Major or mild NCD due to TBI may be accompanied by other specified or unspecified
 depressive or anxiety disorders characterized by disturbances in emotional function (e.g.,
 irritability, easy frustration, tension and anxiety, affective lability). Other specified or
 712
 unspecified personality disorders may also occur as a result of symptoms such as disinhibition,
 apathy, suspiciousness, or aggression. Medical comorbidities may occur with neurological and
 physical disturbances characterized by headache, fatigue, sleep disorders, vertigo or dizziness,
 tinnitus or hyperacusis, photosensitivity, anosmia, reduced tolerance to psychotropic
 medications, and, particularly in more severe TBI, neurological symptoms and signs (e.g.,
 seizures, hemiparesis, visual disturbances, cranial nerve deficits) and evidence of orthopedic
 injuries. The most common medical and psychiatric comorbidities associated with moderate-to
severe TBI are (in order of frequency) back pain, depression, hypertension, anxiety, fractures,
 high blood cholesterol, sleep disorders, panic attacks, osteoarthritis, and diabetes.
 Among individuals with substance use disorders, the neurocognitive effects of the substance
 contribute to or compound the TBI-associated cognitive disturbances, particularly among
 individuals with two or more TBIs.
 PTSD can co-occur with TBI in civilian, military, and veterans populations. TBI and PTSD
 produce similar neurocognitive symptoms (e.g., disturbances of complex attention, processing
 speed, learning and memory, and executive function), and either or both conditions, as well as
 co-occurring depression and sleep disturbances, may explain neurocognitive symptoms in
 individuals with such comorbidities.
