Major or Mild Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. The disturbance has insidious onset and gradual progression.
 C. Either (1) or (2):
 1. Behavioral variant:
 a. Three or more of the following behavioral symptoms:
 i. Behavioral disinhibition.
 ii. Apathy or inertia.
 iii. Loss of sympathy or empathy.
 696
 iv. Perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive/ritualistic behavior.
 v. Hyperorality and dietary changes.
 b. Prominent decline in social cognition and/or executive abilities.
 2. Language variant:
 a. Prominent decline in language ability, in the form of speech production,
 word finding, object naming, grammar, or word comprehension.
 D. Relative sparing of learning and memory and perceptual-motor function.
 E. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
 neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental,
 neurological, or systemic disorder.
 Probable frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if either of the
 following is present; otherwise, possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder
 should be diagnosed:
 1. Evidence of a causative frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder genetic mutation,
 from either family history or genetic testing.
 2. Evidence of disproportionate frontal and/or temporal lobe involvement from
 neuroimaging.
 Possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if there is no
 evidence of a genetic mutation, and neuroimaging has not been performed.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable or possible frontotemporal
 degeneration, with behavioral disturbance, code first G31.09 frontotemporal
 degeneration, followed by F02.81. For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable
 or possible frontotemporal degeneration, without behavioral disturbance, code first
 G31.09 frontotemporal degeneration, followed by F02.80.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration, code G31.84.
 (Note: Do not use the additional code for frontotemporal degeneration. “With
 behavioral disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but
 should still be recorded.)
 For major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder: Use additional code(s) to
 indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to frontotemporal
 degeneration (e.g., F06.33 bipolar and related disorder due to frontotemporal
 degeneration, with manic features; F07.0 personality change due to frontotemporal
 degeneration, disinhibited type).
 Diagnostic Features
 Major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder (NCD) comprises a number of syndromic
 variants characterized by the progressive development of behavioral and personality change
 and/or language impairment. The behavioral variant and two language variants (semantic and
 agrammatic/nonfluent) exhibit distinct patterns of brain atrophy and some distinctive
 neuropathology. The criteria must be met for either the behavioral or the language variant to
 make the diagnosis, but many individuals present with features of both.
 Individuals with behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with varying
 degrees of apathy or disinhibition. They may lose interest in socialization, self-care, and personal
 responsibilities, or display socially inappropriate behaviors. Insight is usually impaired, and this
 often delays medical consultation. The first referral is often to a psychiatrist. Individuals may
 develop changes in social style, and in religious and political
 697
 beliefs, with repetitive movements, hoarding, changes in eating behavior, and hyperorality. In
 later stages, loss of sphincter control may occur. Cognitive decline is less prominent, and formal
 testing may show relatively few deficits in the early stages. Common neurocognitive symptoms
 are lack of planning and organization, distractibility, and poor judgment. Deficits in executive
 function, such as poor performance on tests of mental flexibility, abstract reasoning, and
 response inhibition, are present, but learning and memory are relatively spared, and perceptual
motor abilities are almost always preserved in the early stages.
 Individuals with language-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with primary
 progressive aphasia with gradual onset, with two subtypes commonly described: semantic variant
 and agrammatic/nonfluent variant; each variant has distinctive features and corresponding
 neuropathology. A third form of progressive language decline, called logopenic progressive
 aphasia, is associated with left temporoparietal dysfunction and is often caused by Alzheimer’s
 disease pathology.
 “Probable” is distinguished from “possible” frontotemporal NCD by the presence of
 causative genetic factors (e.g., mutations in the gene coding for microtubule-associated protein
 tau) or by the presence of distinctive atrophy or reduced activity in frontotemporal regions on
 structural or functional imaging.
 Associated Features
Extrapyramidal features may be prominent in some cases, with an overlap with syndromes such
 as progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. Features of motor neuron
 disease may be present in some cases (e.g., muscle atrophy, weakness). A subset of individuals
 develop visual hallucinations.
 Prevalence
 Major or mild frontotemporal NCD is a common cause of early-onset NCD in individuals
 younger than 65 years. In international studies, population prevalence estimates are in the range
 of 2–31 per 100,000, with overall rates generally noted to be equal in men and women, although
 variation exists among studies. Approximately 20%–25% of cases of frontotemporal NCD occur
 in individuals older than 65 years. Frontotemporal NCD accounts for about 5% of all cases of
 dementia in unselected autopsy series. The behavioral variant is the most common presentation
 of NCD due to frontotemporal degeneration, occurring in approximately 60% of cases.
 Development and Course
 Individuals with major or mild frontotemporal NCD commonly present in their 50s, although the
 age at onset varies from the 20s through the 80s. The disease is gradually progressive, with
 median survival being 6–11 years after symptom onset and 3–4 years after diagnosis. Survival is
 shorter and decline is faster in major or mild frontotemporal NCD than in typical Alzheimer’s
 disease.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Approximately 40% of individuals with major or mild frontotemporal
 NCD have a family history of early-onset NCD, and approximately 10% show an autosomal
 dominant inheritance pattern. A number of genetic factors have been identified, such as
 mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), the granulin
 gene (GRN), and the C9ORF72 gene (C9orf72). A number of families with causative mutations
 have been identified (see the section “Diagnostic Markers” for this disorder), but many
 individuals with known familial transmission do not have a known mutation. The presence of
 motor neuron disease is associated with a more rapid deterioration.
 698
 Diagnostic Markers
 Computed tomography (CT) or structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may show distinct
 patterns of atrophy. In behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD, both frontal lobes
 (especially the medial frontal lobes) and the anterior temporal lobes are atrophic. In semantic
 language–variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD, the middle, inferior, and anterior temporal
 lobes are atrophic bilaterally but asymmetrically, with the left side usually being more affected.
 Nonfluent language–variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD is associated with predominantly
 left posterior frontal-insular atrophy. Functional imaging demonstrates hypoperfusion and/or
 cortical hypometabolism in the corresponding brain regions, which may be present in the early
 stages in the absence of structural abnormality. Emerging biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease
(e.g., cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta and tau levels, and amyloid imaging) may help in the
 differential diagnosis, but the distinction from Alzheimer’s disease can remain difficult.
 In familial cases of frontotemporal NCD, the identification of genetic mutations may help
 confirm the diagnosis. Mutations associated with frontotemporal NCD include the genes
 encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and granulin (GRN), C9ORF72,
 transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43, or TARDBP), valosin-containing
 protein (VCP), chromatin modifying protein 2B (CHMP2B), and fused in sarcoma protein
 (FUS).
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Frontotemporal
 Neurocognitive Disorder
 Because of the relative early age at onset of the disorder, the disorder often affects workplace and
 family life. Because of the involvement of language and/or behavior, function is often more
 severely impaired relatively early in the course. For individuals with the behavioral variant, prior
 to diagnostic clarification there may be significant family disruption, legal involvement, and
 problems in the workplace because of socially inappropriate behaviors. The functional
 impairment attributable to behavioral change and language dysfunction, which can include
 hyperorality, impulsive wandering, and other disinhibited behaviors, may far exceed that
 attributable to the cognitive disturbance and may lead to nursing home placement or
 institutionalization. These behaviors can be severely disruptive, even in structured care settings,
 particularly when the individuals are otherwise healthy, nonfrail, and free of other medical
 comorbidities.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Other neurodegenerative diseases may be distinguished from
 major or mild frontotemporal NCD by their characteristic features. In major or mild NCD due to
 Alzheimer’s disease, decline in learning and memory is an early feature. However, 10%–30% of
 individuals presenting with a syndrome suggestive of major or mild frontotemporal NCD are
 found at autopsy to have Alzheimer’s disease pathology. This occurs more frequently in
 individuals who present with progressive dysexecutive syndromes in the absence of behavioral
 changes or movement disorder or in those with the logopenic variant.
 In major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies, core and suggestive features of Lewy bodies must
 be present. In major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, spontaneous parkinsonism
 emerges well before the cognitive decline. In major or mild vascular NCD, depending on
 affected brain regions, there may also be loss of executive function and behavioral changes such
 as apathy, and this disorder should be considered in the differential diagnosis. However, history
 of a cerebrovascular event is temporally related to the onset of cognitive impairment in major or
 mild vascular NCD, and neuroimaging reveals infarctions or white matter lesions sufficient to
 account for the clinical picture.
 699
 Other neurological conditions.
 Major or mild frontotemporal NCD overlaps with progressive
 supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and motor neuron disease clinically as well as
Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 pathologically. Progressive supranuclear palsy is characterized by supranuclear gaze palsies and
 axial-predominant parkinsonism. Pseudobulbar signs may be present, and retropulsion (losing
 balance in a backward direction) is often prominent. Neurocognitive assessment shows
 psychomotor slowing, poor working memory, and executive dysfunction. Corticobasal
 degeneration presents with asymmetric rigidity, limb apraxia, postural instability, myoclonus,
 alien limb phenomenon, and cortical sensory loss. Many individuals with behavioral-variant
 major or mild frontotemporal NCD show features of motor neuron disease, which tend to be
 mixed upper and predominantly lower motor neuron disease.
 Behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal
 NCD may be mistaken for a primary mental disorder, such as major depression, bipolar
 disorders, or schizophrenia, and individuals with this variant often present initially to psychiatry.
 Over time, the development of progressive neurocognitive difficulties will help to make the
 distinction. A careful medical evaluation will help to exclude treatable causes of NCDs, such as
 metabolic disturbances, nutritional deficiencies, and infections. If the symptoms characteristic of
 a primary mental disorder (e.g., delusions) are judged to be due to the physiological effects of
 frontotemporal degeneration, a diagnosis of the appropriate mental disorder due to
 frontotemporal degeneration should be given instead of the primary psychotic disorder (e.g.,
 psychotic disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration, with delusions).