Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s
 Disease
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment in one or more
 cognitive domains (for major neurocognitive disorder, at least two domains must
 be impaired).
 C. Criteria are met for either probable or possible Alzheimer’s disease as follows:
 For major neurocognitive disorder:
 Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if either of the following is present;
 otherwise, possible Alzheimer’s disease should be diagnosed.
 1. Evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from family
 history or genetic testing.
 2. All three of the following are present:
 a. Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning and at least one other
 cognitive domain (based on detailed history or serial neuropsychological
 testing).
 b. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended
 plateaus.
 c. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative
 or cerebrovascular disease, or another neurological, mental, or systemic
 disease or condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
 For mild neurocognitive disorder:
 Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if there is evidence of a causative
 Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from either genetic testing or family history.
 Possible Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if there is no evidence of a
 causative Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from either genetic testing or
 family history, and all three of the following are present:
 1. Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning.
 2. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended plateaus.
3. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative or
 cerebrovascular disease, or another neurological or systemic disease or
 condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
 D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
 neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental,
 neurological, or systemic disorder.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable or possible Alzheimer’s disease,
 with behavioral disturbance, code first G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease, followed by
 F02.81. For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable or possible Alzheimer’s
 disease, without behavioral disturbance, code first G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease,
 followed by F02.80.
 691
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, code G31.84. (Note:
 Do not use the additional code for Alzheimer’s disease. “With behavioral
 disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
 be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease: Use additional
 code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to Alzheimer’s
 disease (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with delusions;
 F06.32 depressive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with major depressive–like
 episode).
 Diagnostic Features
 Beyond the neurocognitive disorder (NCD) syndrome (Criterion A), the core features of major or
 mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease include an insidious onset and gradual progression of
 cognitive and behavioral symptoms (Criterion B). The typical presentation is amnestic (i.e., with
 impairment in memory and learning). Unusual nonamnestic presentations, particularly
 visuospatial and logopenic aphasic variants, also exist. A significant proportion of individuals,
 likely more than half, first present with behavioral symptoms before the onset of cognitive
 symptoms; the presence of behavioral disturbance should be noted using the appropriate specifier
 codes. At the mild NCD phase, Alzheimer’s disease manifests typically with impairment in
 memory and learning, sometimes accompanied by deficits in executive function. At the major
 NCD phase, visuoconstructional/perceptual-motor ability and language (e.g., word retrieval) will
 also be impaired, particularly when the NCD is moderate to severe. Social cognition tends to be
 preserved until late in the course of the disease with the exception of individuals who have the
 less common variants with significant dysexecutive and behavioral disturbance.
 A level of diagnostic certainty must be specified denoting Alzheimer’s disease as the
 “probable” or “possible” etiology (Criterion C). Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed in
both major and mild NCD if there is evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease gene, either
 from genetic testing or from an autosomal dominant family history coupled with autopsy
 confirmation or a genetic test in an affected family member. At present, the designation of
 “probable” represents the highest level of diagnostic certainty within the current criteria
 framework. However, current developments in biomarkers continue to increase diagnostic
 certainty (e.g., when brain positron emission tomography [PET] scans may indicate the presence
 of Alzheimer’s pathology, such as evidence of amyloid and/or tau deposition by imaging or
 cerebrospinal [CSF] analysis). For major NCD, a typical clinical picture, without extended
 plateaus or evidence of mixed etiology, can also be diagnosed as due to probable Alzheimer’s
 disease. However, in some individuals there may be prolonged periods of very slow or minimal
 progression. For mild NCD, given the lesser degree of certainty that the deficits will progress,
 these features are only sufficient for a possible Alzheimer’s etiology. As stated above, however,
 new biomarker methods may affect the use of “probable” and “possible” in mild NCD. If the
 etiology appears mixed, mild NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed. In any case,
 for both mild and major NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, the clinical features must not suggest
 another primary etiology for the NCD (Criterion D). As biomarker data continue to inform the
 nature of underlying pathologies, it is likely that the existence of multiple etiologies will be more
 systematically mapped in the future to better identify diagnostic variations in NCD due to
 multiple etiologies.
 Associated Features
 For individuals with NCD due to Alzheimer's disease, symptoms extend beyond cognitive
 deficits to include neuropsychiatric symptoms such as agitation, apathy, depression, delusions,
 and sleep disorders. Neuropsychiatric symptoms may also be described as
 692
 behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia and have been observed in neurocognitive
 disorders of all etiologies. These symptoms are nearly universal in Alzheimer's disease as
 confirmed in two U.S. population samples, with 5-year follow-up in one reporting that 98% of
 individuals with NCD due to Alzheimer's disease develop neuropsychiatric symptoms.
 Neuropsychiatric symptoms lead to disability, worsening quality of life, greater impairment in
 activities of daily living, faster cognitive and functional decline, greater caregiver burden, earlier
 institutionalization, and accelerated mortality. Neuropsychiatric symptoms are often more
 distressing than cognitive manifestations and are frequently the reason that health care assistance
 is sought. These symptoms are also frequently present at the mild NCD stage, with evidence
 suggesting that more than half of individuals who develop dementia begin with neuropsychiatric
 symptoms. At the mild NCD stage or the mildest level of major NCD, depression, irritability,
 and/or apathy are most often seen. With moderately severe major NCD, delusions, agitation,
 combativeness, and wandering are common. Late in the illness, gait disturbance, dysphagia,
 incontinence, myoclonus, and seizures are observed.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of overall NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease rises steeply with age. In high
income countries, it ranges from 5% to 10% in individuals ages 60–69 years to at least 25%
 thereafter. An estimated 5.4 million Americans of all ages had dementia due to Alzheimer’s
 disease in 2016, including about 200,000 individuals with disease onset before age 65. Dementia
 due to Alzheimer’s disease is found in 11% of individuals age 65 and older and 32% of those age
 85 and older. Estimates applying incidence rates of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease to U.S.
 census data indicate that 81% of those with the disease are age 75 or older. The percentage of
 dementias attributable to Alzheimer’s disease ranges from about 60% to over 90%, depending on
 the setting and diagnostic criteria. Mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease is likely to represent a
 substantial fraction of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) as well.
 Studies show that prevalence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease tends to vary by
 ethnoracial background; for example, in the United States, prevalence in individuals age 65 years
 and older ranges from 3.5% to 14.4%, depending on ethnoracial group, age, and assessment
 methodology. Higher prevalence has been found among African Americans and U.S. Latinx of
 Caribbean origin, after adjustment for gender and clinical comorbidities.
 Development and Course
 Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease progresses gradually, at times with plateaus,
 through severe dementia to death. The mean duration of survival after diagnosis is approximately
 10 years, reflecting the advanced age of the majority of individuals rather than the course of the
 disease; some individuals can live with the disease for as long as 20 years. Late-stage individuals
 are eventually mute and bedbound. Death most commonly results from aspiration in those who
 survive through the full course. In mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, impairments increase
 over time, and functional status gradually declines until symptoms reach the threshold for the
 diagnosis of major NCD.
 The onset of symptoms is usually at ages 70 through 89; early-onset forms seen in
 individuals ages 40–59 are often, but not always, related to known causative mutations.
 Symptoms and pathology do not differ much by onset ages. However, younger individuals are
 more likely to survive the full course of the disease, while older individuals are more likely to
 have numerous medical comorbidities that affect the course and management of the illness.
 Diagnostic complexity is higher in older adults because of the increased likelihood of comorbid
 medical illness and mixed pathology. Age at symptom onset, rate of cognitive decline, and
 survival rates appear to vary by ethnoracial background. For example, compared
 693
 with non-Latinx Whites, U.S. Latinx can develop Alzheimer’s disease symptoms up to 4
 years earlier, African Americans tend to show slower cognitive decline, and both underserved
 groups may have longer survival periods.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 A number of risk factors have been identified, including low educational status, midlife
 hypertension, obesity, and hearing loss, as well as late-life smoking, depression, physical
 inactivity, social isolation, and diabetes. The co-occurrence of multiple vascular risk factors also
 increases risk for Alzheimer’s disease and may act by increasing cerebrovascular pathology or
also through direct effects on Alzheimer’s pathology. Traumatic brain injury, especially in men,
 may increase risk for major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, although this relationship
 remains controversial.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Age is definitively the strongest risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease, as
 the prevalence estimates demonstrate. A strong genetic predisposition (60%–80% of attributable
 risk) has been demonstrated. Rare mutations on chromosomes 1, 14, and 21 follow Mendelian
 inheritance, leading to autosomal dominant forms. Individuals with Down syndrome (trisomy
 21) may develop Alzheimer’s disease if they survive to midlife. The most common risk factors
 are polygenic, with more than 45 risk genes/loci having been identified, typically with small
 effects on risk. The strongest genetic susceptibility polymorphism, apolipoprotein E4
 (APOE*E4), increases risk and decreases age at onset, particularly in homozygous individuals,
 although some homozygous individuals survive to advanced ages without developing symptoms.
 Ethnoracial and national origin are related to the genetic susceptibility profile for
 Alzheimer’s disease. While APOE*E4 is associated with Alzheimer’s disease risk, this
 association has not been consistently found across all ethnic and racialized groups. For example,
 some studies have identified a unique mutation in the Gly206Ala presenilin 1 gene among
 individuals of Puerto Rican descent with Alzheimer’s disease, which is also related to early
 onset. Moreover, some studies have found a stronger association with ABCA7, a protein
 transporter gene, among individuals who identify as African American than among U.S. Whites.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Detection of an NCD may be more difficult in cultural and socioeconomic settings where
 memory loss is considered normal in old age, where older adults face fewer cognitive demands
 in everyday life, or where very low educational levels pose greater challenges to objective
 cognitive assessment.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Women were found to have a higher incidence of Alzheimer’s disease than men in several
 European studies, but the incidence was similar in men and women in most North American
 studies. Some studies suggested that the symptoms of dementia progress faster in women than in
 men. However, because women perform better than men of the same age on some verbal
 memory tests, it is also possible that gender differences reflect the cut-off scores of tests used to
 support a diagnosis. Different cut-off scores may be useful in men and women when assessing
 for mild cognitive impairment.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Amyloid-predominant neuritic plaques, tau-predominant neurofibrillary tangles, and neuronal
 loss observed microscopically or manifested in regional cortical atrophy (e.g., hippocampal,
 parietal, frontal) are hallmarks of the pathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and may be
 confirmed via postmortem histopathological examination. For
 694
 early-onset cases with apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, a mutation in one of the known
causative Alzheimer’s disease genes—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSEN1),
 or presenilin 2 (PSEN2)—may be involved, and genetic testing for such mutations is
 commercially available, although usually without clinical utility. While APOE E*4 cannot serve
 as a diagnostic marker because it is a risk factor (i.e., neither necessary nor sufficient for disease
 occurrence), in rare instances genetic testing at this locus may have utility in clinical settings.
 Since amyloid beta-42 deposition in the brain occurs early in the pathophysiological cascade,
 amyloid-based diagnostic tests such as amyloid imaging on brain PET scans and reduced levels
 of amyloid beta-42 in the CSF may have diagnostic value. Similarly, tau PET imaging or CSF
 analyses for elevated total tau or phospho-tau levels are available for clinical use. Signs of
 neuronal injury, such as hippocampal and temporoparietal cortical atrophy on a magnetic
 resonance image scan and temporoparietal hypometabolism on a fluorodeoxyglucose PET scan,
 provide evidence of neuronal damage but are less specific for Alzheimer’s disease. Most of these
 biomarkers have been validated and are widely available in tertiary care settings. Blood-derived
 biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease are being developed and are likely to become clinically
 available as diagnostic, prognostic, and theranostic indicators.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Alzheimer’s disease is associated with a moderate risk of suicide even many years after the
 diagnosis; thus, ongoing assessment of mood and suicidality is appropriate. A large population
 study in Denmark found that the risk of suicide in individuals with a hospital-determined
 diagnosis of dementia was three- to eightfold greater compared with persons without dementia.
 In contrast, several other studies found mixed results regarding suicide risk in individuals with
 Alzheimer’s disease. A review of the neurobiology of suicide in the elderly found preliminary
 evidence of an association with cognitive deficits and elderly suicidal behavior, especially
 regarding impaired decision-making and reduced cognitive inhibition.
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Alzheimer’s Disease
 Because of the effect on cognition, behavior, and functioning, NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease
 has a serious and substantial impact on individuals, their caregivers, and families. Early in the
 disease course, memory loss, disorientation, and mood symptoms adversely impact
 independence, and create safety concerns (e.g., around driving). For individuals with onset at
 younger ages, NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease can lead to early retirement. As the disease
 advances, individuals become increasingly disabled in instrumental and basic daily living
 activities, slowly becoming fully dependent on others. Caregivers for individuals with NCD due
 to Alzheimer’s disease often see their social network deteriorate and develop a series of health
 and mental health problems that can adversely affect outcomes for both the caregiver and the
 individual with the NCD.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Major and mild NCDs due to other neurodegenerative processes
 (e.g., Lewy body disease, frontotemporal degeneration) share the insidious onset and gradual
 decline caused by Alzheimer’s disease but have distinctive core features of their own (which are
not always present). For example, NCD with Lewy bodies is typically characterized by frequent
 fluctuations in cognition early in the disease, parkinsonian features, gait imbalances, and visual
 hallucinations. Individuals with frontotemporal NCD may present with a distinct behavioral or
 language variant. The behavioral variant typically
 695
 first manifests with prominent changes in social behavior, such as disinhibition, apathy, or
 perseverative behavior, that may not infrequently lead to a primary psychiatric diagnosis. In
 contrast, the language variant of frontotemporal NCD may manifest with impairments in
 expressive language or word comprehension.
 In major or mild vascular NCD, there is typically a history of stroke temporally related to the
 onset of cognitive impairment, and infarcts or hemosiderin deposits observed on brain imaging
 can be judged sufficient to account for the clinical picture. However, major or mild vascular
 NCD shares many clinical features with Alzheimer’s disease; frequently Alzheimer’s pathology
 is present alone or in combination with vascular pathologies. It should be noted that white matter
 change alone does not constitute enough evidence of cerebrovascular disease to propose a mixed
 etiology if the other diagnostic considerations support the diagnosis of NCD due to Alzheimer’s
 disease. The presence of subcortical ischemic changes on neuroimaging must be interpreted
 carefully in view of whether concurrent Alzheimer’s pathology is present.
 Other concurrent, active neurological or systemic illness.
 Other neurological or systemic illness
 should be considered if there is an appropriate temporal relationship and severity to account for
 the clinical picture. At the mild NCD level, it may be difficult to distinguish an Alzheimer’s
 disease etiology from that of another medical condition (e.g., thyroid disorders, vitamin B12
 deficiency).
 Major depressive disorder.
 Particularly at the mild NCD level, the differential diagnosis also
 includes major depression. The presence of depression may be associated with reduced daily
 functioning and poor concentration that may resemble an NCD, but improvement with treatment
 of depression may be useful in making the distinction. If the symptoms meeting criteria for a
 major depressive episode are judged to be due to the physiological effects of Alzheimer’s
 disease, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with major depressive
like episode, should be given instead of major depressive disorder.
 Comorbidity
 Most individuals with Alzheimer’s disease are elderly and have multiple medical conditions that
 can complicate diagnosis and influence the clinical course. Major or mild NCD due to
 Alzheimer’s disease commonly co-occurs with cerebrovascular disease, which contributes to the
 clinical picture. When a comorbid condition contributes to the NCD in an individual with
 Alzheimer’s disease, then NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed.