 Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Another
 Medical Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the neurocognitive disorder is the pathophysiological consequence of
 another medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis).
 C. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g.,
 major depressive disorder) or another specific neurocognitive disorder (e.g.,
 major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease).
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, with behavioral
 disturbance, code first the other medical condition, followed by the major
 neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, with behavioral
 disturbance (e.g., G35 multiple sclerosis, F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder due
 to multiple sclerosis, with behavioral disturbance).
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, without
 behavioral disturbance, code first the other medical condition, followed by the major
 neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, without behavioral
 disturbance (e.g., G35 multiple sclerosis, F02.80 major neurocognitive disorder due
 to multiple sclerosis, without behavioral disturbance).
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
Other major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 730
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, code G31.84.
 (Note: Do not use the additional code for the other medical condition. “With
 behavioral disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but
 should still be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition: Use
 additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to
 another medical condition (e.g., F06.32 depressive disorder due to multiple
 sclerosis, with major depressive–like episode).
 Diagnostic Features
 A number of medical conditions can cause neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) other than those
 specific etiologies (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) already included in prior NCD criteria sets in this
 chapter. These conditions include structural lesions (e.g., primary or secondary brain tumors,
 subdural hematoma, slowly progressive or normal-pressure hydrocephalus), hypoxia related to
 hypoperfusion from heart failure, endocrine conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia,
 hypoglycemia), nutritional conditions (e.g., deficiencies of thiamine or niacin), other infectious
 conditions (e.g., neurosyphilis, cryptococcosis), immune disorders (e.g., temporal arteritis,
 systemic lupus erythematosus), hepatic or renal failure, metabolic conditions (e.g., Kufs’ disease,
 adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy, other storage diseases of adulthood and
 childhood), and other neurological conditions (e.g., epilepsy, multiple sclerosis). Unusual causes
 of central nervous system injury, such as electrical shock or intracranial radiation, are generally
 evident from the history. The temporal association between the onset or exacerbation of the
 medical condition and the development of the cognitive deficit offers the greatest support that the
 NCD is a pathophysiological consequence of the medical condition. Diagnostic certainty
 regarding this relationship may be increased if the neurocognitive deficits ameliorate partially or
 stabilize in the context of treatment of the medical condition.
 Development and Course
 Typically the course of the NCD progresses in a manner that is commensurate with progression
 of the underlying medical condition. In circumstances where the medical condition is treatable
 (e.g., hypothyroidism), the neurocognitive deficit may improve or at least not progress. When the
 medical condition has a deteriorative course (e.g., secondary progressive multiple sclerosis), the
 neurocognitive deficits will progress along with the temporal course of illness.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Associated physical examination and laboratory findings and other clinical features depend on
 the nature and severity of the medical condition.
 Differential Diagnosis
 The presence of an attributable medical condition does
 not entirely exclude the possibility of another etiological type of major or mild NCD. If cognitive
deficits persist following successful treatment of an associated medical condition, then another
 etiology may be responsible for the cognitive decline.
 731