Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to
 Huntington’s Disease
Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression.
 C. There is clinically established Huntington’s disease, or risk for Huntington’s
 disease based on family history or genetic testing.
 D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
 is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with behavioral
 disturbance, code first G10 Huntington’s disease, followed by F02.81 major
 neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with behavioral disturbance.
 For major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, without behavioral
 disturbance, code first G10 Huntington’s disease, followed by F02.80 major
 neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, without behavioral disturbance.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 727
 For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, code G31.84. (Note:
 Do not use the additional code for Huntington’s disease. “With behavioral
 disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
 be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease: Use
 additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to
 Huntington’s disease (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to Huntington’s disease
 with depressive features; F06.4 anxiety disorder due to Huntington’s disease).
 Diagnostic Features
 Progressive cognitive impairment is a core feature of Huntington’s disease, with early changes in
 executive function (i.e., processing speed, organization, and planning) typically being more
 prominent than decline in learning and memory. Cognitive and associated behavioral changes
 often precede the emergence of the typical motor abnormalities of bradykinesia (i.e., slowing of
 voluntary movement) and chorea (i.e., involuntary jerking movements). A diagnosis of definite
 Huntington’s disease is given in the presence of unequivocal, extrapyramidal motor
 abnormalities in an individual with either a family history of Huntington’s disease or genetic
 testing showing a CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the HTT gene, located on chromosome
 4.
 Associated Features
 Irritability, apathy, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, depression, and, more rarely,
psychosis can all be associated with Huntington’s disease and often precede the onset of motor
 symptoms.
 Prevalence
 Neurocognitive deficits are an eventual outcome of Huntington’s disease; the worldwide
 prevalence is estimated to be 2.7 per 100,000. The prevalence of Huntington’s disease in North
 America, Europe, and Australia is 5.7 per 100,000, with a much lower prevalence of 0.40 per
 100,000 in Asia.
 Development and Course
 The age at diagnosis of Huntington’s disease varies widely, but symptoms are most often
 observed between ages 35 and 45 years. Age at onset is inversely correlated with CAG
 expansion length. Juvenile Huntington’s disease (onset before age 20) may present more
 commonly with bradykinesia, dystonia, and rigidity than with the choreic movements
 characteristic of the adult-onset disorder. The disease is gradually progressive, with the average
 length of survival after clinical diagnosis estimated to be approximately 10–20 years, although
 affected individuals may demonstrate significant variability in disease progression.
 Phenotypic expression of Huntington’s disease varies by presence of motor, cognitive, and
 psychiatric symptoms. Psychiatric and cognitive abnormalities can predate the motor
 abnormality by a decade or more. Initial symptoms requiring care often include irritabity,
 anxiety, or depressed mood. Other behavioral disturbances may include pronounced apathy,
 disinhibition, impulsivity, and impaired insight, with apathy often becoming more progressive
 over time. Early movement symptoms may involve the appearance of fidgetiness of the
 extremities as well as mild apraxia (i.e., difficulty with purposeful movements), particularly with
 fine motor tasks. As the disorder progresses, other motor problems include impaired gait (ataxia)
 and postural instability. Motor impairment eventually affects speech production (dysarthria)
 such that the speech becomes very difficult to understand, which may result in significant
 distress resulting from the communication barrier in the context of comparatively intact
 cognition. Advanced motor disease severely affects gait with
 728
 progressive ataxia. Eventually individuals become nonambulatory. End-stage motor disease
 impairs motor control of eating and swallowing, typically a major contributor to the death of the
 individual from aspiration pneumonia.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 The genetic basis of Huntington’s disease is a fully penetrant autosomal
 dominant expansion of the CAG trinucleotide, often called a CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene.
 A repeat length of 40 or more is invariably associated with Huntington’s disease, with longer
 repeat lengths associated with early age at onset. A CAG repeat length in the 36–39 range is
 considered to be partially penetrant, which means that this length could or could not lead to
 Huntington’s disease. If Huntington’s disease does occur with repeat lengths in this range, it is
 more often associated with onset late in life (diagnosis after age 70).
Diagnostic Markers
 Genetic testing is the primary laboratory test for the determination of Huntington’s disease,
 which is an autosomal dominant disorder with complete penetrance. The trinucleotide CAG is
 observed to have a repeat expansion in the gene that encodes huntingtin protein on chromosome
 4. A diagnosis of Huntington’s disease is not made in the presence of the gene expansion alone,
 but the diagnosis is made only after motor symptoms become manifest. Some individuals with a
 positive family history request genetic testing in a presymptomatic stage. Associated features
 may also include neuroimaging changes; volume loss in the basal ganglia, particularly the
 caudate nucleus and putamen, is well known to occur and progresses over the course of illness.
 Other structural and functional changes have been observed in brain imaging but remain research
 measures.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 In Huntington’s disease, an elevated suicide risk compared with the general population has been
 well documented. A literature review and report of data from a large observational study found
 that suicide is among the leading causes of death in Huntington’s disease. The elevated risk of
 suicidal thoughts in Huntington’s disease has been shown in diagnosed individuals both prior to
 and after manifesting the motor symptoms of Huntington’s disease. Risk factors for suicidal
 thoughts include depressive symptoms, anxiety, irritability, psychosis, and apathy—emphasizing
 the importance of treating depressive symptoms and assessing suicidal thoughts during clinical
 monitoring. A large European cohort study of Huntington’s disease similarly found that the most
 frequent causes of death were pneumonia (19.5%), other infections (6.9%), and suicide (6.6%).
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Huntington’s Disease
 In the prodromal phase of illness and at early diagnosis, occupational decline is most common,
 with most individuals reporting some loss of ability to engage in their typical work. The
 emotional, behavioral, and cognitive aspects of Huntington’s disease, such as disinhibition and
 personality changes, are highly associated with functional decline. Cognitive deficits that
 contribute most to functional decline may include speed of processing, initiation, and attention
 rather than memory impairment. Given that Huntington’s disease onset occurs in productive
 years of life, it may have a very disruptive effect on performance in the work setting as well as
 social life, family life, and important aspects of daily functioning such as driving. As the disease
 progresses, disability from problems such as
 729
 impaired gait, dysarthria, and impulsive or irritable behaviors may substantially add to the level
 of impairment and daily care needs, over and above the care needs attributable to cognitive
 decline. Severe choreic movements may substantially interfere with provision of care such as
 bathing, dressing, and toileting.
 Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders.
 Other neurocognitive disorders.
 Other movement disorders.
 Early symptoms of Huntington’s disease may include instability of mood,
 irritability, or compulsive behaviors that may suggest another mental disorder. However, genetic
 testing or the development of motor symptoms will distinguish the presence of Huntington’s
 disease. In such cases, if the mood symptoms are a focus of clinical attention, they may be
 indicated by an additional diagnosis of depressive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with
 depressive features.
 The early symptoms of Huntington’s disease, particularly
 symptoms of executive dysfunction and impaired psychomotor speed, may resemble other
 neurocognitive disorders (NCDs), such as major or mild vascular NCD.
 Huntington’s disease must also be differentiated from other disorders
 or conditions associated with chorea, such as Wilson’s disease, drug-induced tardive dyskinesia,
 Sydenham’s chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus, or senile chorea. Rarely, individuals may
 present with a course similar to that of Huntington’s disease but without positive genetic testing;
 this is considered to be a Huntington’s disease phenocopy that results from a variety of potential
 genetic factors.