Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder With Lewy Bodies
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 B. The disorder has an insidious onset and gradual progression.
 C. The disorder meets a combination of core diagnostic features and suggestive
 diagnostic features for either probable or possible neurocognitive disorder with
 Lewy bodies.
 For probable major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, the
 individual has two core features, or one suggestive feature with one or more core
 features. For possible major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy
 bodies, the individual has only one core feature, or one or more suggestive
 features.
 1. Core diagnostic features:
 a. Fluctuating cognition with pronounced variations in attention and
 alertness.
 b. Recurrent visual hallucinations that are well formed and detailed.
 c. Spontaneous features of parkinsonism, with onset subsequent to the
 development of cognitive decline.
 2. Suggestive diagnostic features:
 a. Meets criteria for rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder.
b. Severe neuroleptic sensitivity.
 D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
 neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental,
 neurological, or systemic disorder.
 Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
 For major neurocognitive disorder with probable or possible Lewy bodies, with
 behavioral disturbance, code first G31.83 Lewy body disease, followed by F02.81.
 700
 For major neurocognitive disorder with probable or possible Lewy bodies, without
 behavioral disturbance, code first G31.83 Lewy body disease, followed by F02.80.
 Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
 major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
 For mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, code G31.84. (Note: Do not use
 the additional code for Lewy body disease. “With behavioral disturbance” and
 “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
 For major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies: Use additional code(s)
 to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to Lewy body disease (e.g.,
 F06.0 psychotic disorder due to Lewy body disease, with hallucinations; F06.31
 depressive disorder due to Lewy body disease, with depressive features).
 Diagnostic Features
 Major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies corresponds to the condition known as
 dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). The overall major or mild neurocognitive disorder with
 Lewy bodies (NCDLB) category includes not only progressive cognitive impairment (with early
 changes in attention, executive function, and visuoperceptual ability, rather than learning and
 memory) but also recurrent, complex, visual hallucinations; and concurrent symptoms of rapid
 eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (which can be a very early manifestation); as well
 as hallucinations in other sensory modalities, apathy, anxiety, depression, and delusions. The
 cognitive symptoms may fluctuate in a pattern that can resemble a delirium, for which an
 adequate precipitating factor may or may not be found. The variable presentation of NCDLB
 symptoms reduces the likelihood of all symptoms being observed in a brief clinic visit and
 necessitates a thorough assessment, including caregiver observations. The use of assessment
 scales specifically designed to assess fluctuation may aid in diagnosis. Another core feature is
 spontaneous parkinsonism; this can often be relatively mild, and the degree of response to
 levodopa therapy is variable. Up to 25% of individuals with probable NCDLB may never
 develop extrapyramidal signs, and they are not essential for diagnosis. The parkinsonism must be
 distinguished from neuroleptic-induced extrapyramidal signs. Accurate diagnosis is essential to
 safe treatment planning, as up to 50% of individuals with NCDLB have severe sensitivity to
 neuroleptic drugs, and these medications should be used with extreme caution in individuals
 suspected of having an NCDLB diagnosis.
 The diagnosis of mild NCDLB is appropriate for individuals who present with the core
clinical features at a stage when cognitive or functional impairments are not of sufficient severity
 to fulfill criteria for major NCD, particularly if nonamnestic cognitive deficits are prominent.
 However, as for all mild NCDs, there will often be insufficient evidence to justify any single
 etiology, and use of the unspecified diagnosis may be more appropriate.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with NCDLB frequently experience repeated falls, syncope, or other transient
 episodes of unresponsiveness. Autonomic dysfunction may be observed, including orthostatic
 hypotension, constipation, and urinary incontinence; hypersomnia and hyposmia may also be
 observed.
 Prevalence
 Limited data from several high-income and low- and middle-income countries show that the
 population-based prevalence estimates for NCDLB range from 0% to 1.2% of the general elderly
 population, and from 0% to 9.7% of all dementia cases. The mean prevalence of major NCDLB
 was 4.2% of all dementias in the community, and in clinic-based studies this increased to 7.5%
 of all dementias. The clinical prevalence of major NCDLB among
 701
 individuals with dementia does not appear to be significantly affected by either age or sex. In
 studies from the United States and United Kingdom, the pathological lesions known as Lewy
 bodies are present in 20%–35% of cases of dementia. In a population-based study in Minnesota
 that relied on medical records, the incidence of NCDLB was approximately three times higher in
 men than in women age 65 or older.
 Development and Course
 NCDLB is a gradually progressive disorder with insidious onset. However, there is often a
 prodromal history of confusional episodes (delirium) of acute onset, which may be precipitated
 by illness or surgery. The distinction between NCDLB, in which Lewy bodies are primarily
 limbic in location (with or without neocortical involvement), and major or mild NCD due to
 Parkinson’s disease, which starts in the brain stem, is the order in which the cognitive and motor
 symptoms emerge. In NCDLB, the cognitive decline is manifested early in the course of illness
 (see the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this disorder).
 Onset of symptoms is typically observed in individuals ages 50–89, with most cases having
 onset in individuals in the mid-70s. Disease course may be characterized by occasional plateaus
 but eventually progresses through severe dementia to death. Average duration of survival is 5.5
7.7 years from the onset of cognitive decline.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Familial aggregation may occur, and several risk genes have been
 identified; but in most cases of NCDLB, there is no family history. The available studies suggest
 that genetic risk factors are as important in NCDLB as in Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’s
disease.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Biomarkers indicative of NCDLB may be considered to carry diagnostic weight equivalent to
 core clinical features; these include low striatal dopamine transporter uptake on single photon
 emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) scan,
 abnormal (low uptake) (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy suggesting cardiac sympathetic
 denervation, and polysomnographic confirmation of REM sleep without atonia. The associated
 condition REM sleep behavior disorder may be diagnosed through a formal sleep study or
 identified by questioning the individual or informant about relevant symptoms. The underlying
 neurodegenerative disease is primarily associated with misfolding and aggregation of α
synuclein, which may be confirmed via postmortem histopathological examination.
 Neuropsychological testing beyond the use of a brief screening instrument may be necessary to
 define cognitive deficits clearly. Assessment scales developed to measure fluctuation can be
 useful.
 Biomarkers supportive of NCDLB but with more limited evidence of diagnostic value
 include the following: preservation of medial temporal volume relative to Alzheimer’s disease on
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), generalized low uptake on SPECT/PET perfusion scan with
 reduced occipital activity with or without the cingulate island sign (sparing of the posterior
 cingulate cortex relative to the precuneus plus cuneus on fluorodeoxyglucose-PET imaging), and
 prominent slow-wave activity on electroencephalogram with periodic fluctuations in the pre
alpha/theta range.
 Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 With Lewy Bodies
 Individuals with NCDLB are more functionally impaired than would be expected for their
 cognitive deficits when contrasted to individuals with other neurodegenerative diseases,
 702
 such as Alzheimer’s disease. This is largely a result of motor and autonomic impairments, which
 cause problems with toileting, transferring, and eating. Sleep disorders and prominent psychiatric
 symptoms may also add to functional difficulties. Consequently, the quality of life of individuals
 with NCDLB is often significantly worse than that of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease.
 The distinction between NCDLB
 and NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is based on the timing and sequence of motor symptoms
 and cognitive symptoms. Consensus criteria for DLB separate NCDLB from NCD due to
 Parkinson’s disease by specifying that for dementia to be attributed to Parkinson’s disease, the
 Parkinson’s disease diagnosis is present for at least 1 year before cognitive decline has reached
 the level of major NCD, whereas for NCDLB, the cognitive symptoms may begin before, with,
 or in the absence of parkinsonism. By contrast, expert consensus criteria for Parkinson’s disease
 propose that if cognitive decline occurs prior to a motor diagnosis, the diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease may still be made; therefore, a clinician may attribute the cognitive decline to the
 Parkinson’s disease and diagnose NCD due to Parkinson’s disease. Consequently, the clinician
 may choose to diagnose NCD due to Parkinson’s disease or NCDLB for individuals with major
 NCD that starts either before or within 12 months of Parkinson’s disease. In such circumstances,
 the clinician decides which diagnosis is more appropriate. If Parkinson’s disease has been
 diagnosed for at least 1 year prior to the onset of cognitive symptoms, then both expert criteria
 agree that NCD due to Parkinson’s disease would typically be the appropriate diagnosis. The
 timing and sequence of parkinsonism and mild NCD may be particularly difficult to determine,
 and unspecified NCD may need to be diagnosed until the order of clinical progression becomes
 evident.
 Comorbidity
 Lewy body pathology frequently coexists with Alzheimer’s disease, transactive response DNA
binding protein 43 (TDP‐43)–related pathology, and cerebrovascular disease pathology,
 particularly in the oldest age groups. TDP-43 is a protein that has been identified as a source of
 the proteinopathies across a range of neurodegenerative disorders, including amyotrophic lateral
 sclerosis and frontotemporal degeneration. The presence of multiple pathological lesions has
 implications for disease prognosis and may be associated with a more rapid cognitive decline and
 shorter survival time.