Enuresis
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes, whether involuntary or intentional.
 B. The behavior is clinically significant as manifested by either a frequency of at
 least twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or the presence of clinically
 significant distress or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other
 important areas of functioning.
 C. Chronological age is at least 5 years (or equivalent developmental level).
 D. The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
 a diuretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
 diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder).
 Specify whether:
 Nocturnal only: Passage of urine only during nighttime sleep.
 F98.0
 Diurnal only: Passage of urine during waking hours.
 Nocturnal and diurnal: A combination of the two subtypes above.
 Subtypes
 The nocturnal-only subtype of enuresis, sometimes referred to as monosymptomatic enuresis, is
 the most common subtype and involves incontinence only during nighttime sleep, typically
 during the first one-third of the night. The diurnal-only subtype occurs in the absence of
 nocturnal enuresis and may be referred to simply as urinary incontinence. Individuals with this
subtype can be divided into two groups. Individuals with “urge incontinence” have sudden urge
 symptoms and detrusor instability, whereas individuals with “voiding postponement”
 consciously defer micturition urges until incontinence results. The nocturnal-and-diurnal subtype
 is also known as nonmonosymptomatic enuresis.
 400
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of enuresis is repeated voiding of urine during the day or at night into bed
 or clothes (Criterion A). Most often the voiding is involuntary, but occasionally it may be
 intentional. To qualify for a diagnosis of enuresis, the voiding of urine must occur at least twice a
 week for at least 3 consecutive months or must cause clinically significant distress or impairment
 in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). The
 individual must have reached an age at which continence is expected (i.e., a chronological age of
 at least 5 years or, for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 5 years)
 (Criterion C). The urinary incontinence is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
 substance (e.g., a diuretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
 diabetes, spina bifida, ectopic ureter in a female, posterior urethral valves in a male, tethered
 cord, a seizure disorder) (Criterion D).
 Associated Features
 During nocturnal enuresis, occasionally the voiding takes place during rapid eye movement
 (REM) sleep, and the child may recall a dream that involved the act of urinating. During daytime
 (diurnal) enuresis, the child defers voiding until incontinence occurs, sometimes because of a
 reluctance to use the toilet as a result of social anxiety or a preoccupation with school or play
 activity. The enuretic events most commonly occur in the early afternoon on school days or after
 returning from school. Children with executive functioning problems and other neurological
 problems that may be associated with symptoms of disruptive behavior may be at high risk for
 urinary incontinence without sensory awareness. It is not uncommon for children with daytime
 urinary incontinence and the nocturnal-and-diurnal subtype of enuresis to have persistence of
 incontinence after appropriate treatment of an associated infection.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of daytime incontinence ranges from 3.2% to 9.0% in children age 7 years, from
 1.1% to 4.2% in youth ages 11–13 years, and from 1.2% to 3.0% in adolescents ages 15–17
 years.
 The prevalence of nocturnal enuresis in the community decreases with age; in several
 geographical settings, including the United States, the Netherlands, and Hong Kong, the range is
 around 5%–10% among 5-year-olds, 3%–5% among 10-year-olds, and around 1% among
 individuals 15 years or older. Boys and members of socially oppressed groups may have higher
 prevalence as found in African American children in the United States and Turkish or Moroccan
 children in the Netherlands. The disorder may also have higher prevalence in youth with learning
 disabilities or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Development and Course
 Enuresis can follow two courses: a “primary” type, in which the individual has never established
 urinary continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the disturbance develops after a period of
 established urinary continence. There are no differences in prevalence of comorbid mental
 disorders between the two types. By definition, primary enuresis begins at age 5 years. The most
 common time for the onset of secondary enuresis is between ages 5 and 8 years, but it may occur
 at any time. After age 5 years, the rate of spontaneous remission is 5%–10% per year. Most
 children with the disorder become continent by adolescence, but in approximately 1% of cases
 the disorder continues into adulthood. Diurnal enuresis is uncommon after age 9 years. While
 occasional diurnal incontinence is not uncommon in middle childhood, it is substantially more
 common in those who also have other co-occurring mental health problems, including cognitive
 and behavioral problems. When enuresis persists into late childhood or adolescence, the
 incontinence may resolve, but urinary frequency generally persists and incontinence can recur
 later in adulthood in women.
 401
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 A number of predisposing factors for bladder dysfunction have been suggested, including
 developmental delays and neuropsychiatric problems.
 Environmental.
 Factors recognized to be associated with bladder dysfunction include delayed
 toileting and psychosocial stress.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Nocturnal enuresis has been associated with a mismatch between
 nocturnal urine production, nocturnal bladder storage capacity, and the ability to arouse from
 sleep. Underlying these mechanisms are possibly disorders of central nervous system signal
 processing and the default mode network. The increased arousal thresholds do not, however,
 mean that these children sleep well; in fact, sleep quality of enuretic children is often poor.
 Nocturnal enuresis is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Heritability has been shown in
 family, twin, and segregation analyses. Risk for childhood nocturnal enuresis is approximately
 3.6 times higher in offspring of enuretic mothers and 10.1 times higher in the presence of
 paternal urinary incontinence. The risk magnitudes for nocturnal enuresis and diurnal
 incontinence are similar.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Enuresis has been reported in a variety of European, African, and Asian countries as well as in
 the United States. At a national level, prevalence rates are remarkably similar, and there is great
 similarity in the developmental trajectories found in different countries. Local school-based
 surveys, however, show wide prevalence variation of nocturnal enuresis across settings in Africa,
 South Asia, Europe, and the Caribbean (4%–50%), at least in part due to methodological
 variation. The very high rates of enuresis in orphanages and other residential institutions are not
 explained by the mode or early timing of toilet training.
 Cultural contexts affect both the diagnosis and the perceived etiology of enuresis. For
 example, traditional Chinese medicine attributes enuresis to long-term kidney yang (masculine
energy) deficiency. Heightened impact on parents of children’s enuresis has been reported in
 societies with economic limitations in obtaining care for the child or in the context of social
 policies that restrict the number of children (e.g., China’s one-child policy), possibly leading to
 higher risk of parental emotional disorders.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Nocturnal enuresis is more common in males than in females (almost 2:1). This male
 preponderance is particularly true in younger age groups, cases with milder severity, and cases
 involving enuresis occurring only at night. Urinary tract infections are frequently associated with
 daytime wetting, especially in females. Diurnal incontinence is more common in females than in
 males, and the ratio increases with age. The relative risk of having a child who develops enuresis
 is greater for previously enuretic fathers than for previously enuretic mothers.
 Functional Consequences of Enuresis
 The amount of impairment associated with enuresis is a function of the limitation on the child’s
 social activities (e.g., ineligibility for sleep-away camp) or its effect on the child’s self-esteem,
 the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment, and rejection on the part of
 caregivers.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Neurogenic bladder or another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of enuresis is not made in the
 presence of a neurogenic bladder or any other structural condition (such as a posterior urethral
 valve or ectopic ureter) or another medical condition that causes polyuria or
 402
 urgency (e.g., untreated diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus) or during an acute urinary tract
 infection. However, a diagnosis is compatible with such medical conditions if urinary
 incontinence was regularly present prior to the development of another medical condition or if it
 persists after the institution of appropriate treatment of the medical condition.
 Medication side effects.
 Enuresis may occur during treatment with antipsychotic medications,
 diuretics, or other medications that may induce constipation, polyuria, or alterations in executive
 functioning, all of which may lead to incontinence. In this case, the diagnosis should not be made
 in isolation but may be noted as a medication side effect. However, a diagnosis of enuresis may
 be made if urinary incontinence was regularly present prior to treatment with the medication.
 Comorbidity
 Although most children with enuresis do not have a comorbid mental disorder, the prevalence of
 comorbid behavioral and developmental symptoms is higher in children with both diurnal and
 nocturnal enuresis than in children without incontinence. Developmental delays, including
 speech, language, learning, and motor skills delays, are also present in a portion of children with
 enuresis. Encopresis and constipation are present in both day and night incontinence. Restless
 legs syndrome and parasomnias such as non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders
(sleepwalking and sleep terror types) are associated with nocturnal enuresis. Additionally, there
 is a link between nocturnal enuresis and heavy snoring or sleep apneas. Approximately 50% of
 enuretic children with proven sleep-disordered breathing will become dry by undergoing
 adenotonsillectomy. Urinary tract infections are more common in children with daytime urinary
 incontinence and nonmonosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis, especially the diurnal subtype, than
 in those who are continent.