Encopresis
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g., clothing, floor),
 whether involuntary or intentional.
 B. At least one such event occurs each month for at least 3 months.
 C. Chronological age is at least 4 years (or equivalent developmental level).
 D. The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
 laxatives) or another medical condition except through a mechanism involving
 constipation.
 Specify whether:
 With constipation and overflow incontinence: There is evidence of
 constipation on physical examination or by history.
 F98.1
 Without constipation and overflow incontinence: There is no evidence of
 constipation on physical examination or by history.
 Subtypes
 Feces in encopresis, “with constipation and overflow incontinence” subtype, are
 characteristically (but not invariably) poorly formed, and leakage can be infrequent to
 continuous, occurring throughout the day and at times during sleep. Only part of the feces is
 passed during toileting, and the incontinence resolves after treatment of the constipation.
 In the “without constipation and overflow incontinence” subtype, feces are likely to be of
 normal form and consistency, and soiling is intermittent. Feces may be deposited in a
 403
 prominent location. This is usually associated with the presence of oppositional defiant
 disorder or conduct disorder or may be the consequence of anal masturbation. Soiling without
 constipation is less common than soiling with constipation.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of encopresis is repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g.,
 clothing or floor) (Criterion A). Most often the passage is involuntary but occasionally may be
intentional. The event must occur at least once a month for at least 3 months (Criterion B), and
 the chronological age of the child must be at least 4 years (or for children with developmental
 delays, the mental age must be at least 4 years) (Criterion C). The fecal incontinence must not be
 exclusively attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or another
 medical condition except through a mechanism involving constipation (Criterion D).
 When the passage of feces is involuntary rather than intentional, it is often related to
 constipation, impaction, and retention with subsequent overflow. The constipation may develop
 for psychological reasons (e.g., anxiety about defecating in a particular place, a more general
 pattern of anxious or oppositional behavior), leading to avoidance of defecation and excessive
 volitional stool retention. Physiological predispositions to constipation include ineffectual
 straining or paradoxical defecation dynamics, with contraction rather than relaxation of the
 external sphincter or pelvic floor during straining for defecation. Dietary habits (such as
 insufficient fluid intake), celiac disease, hypothyroidism, or a medication side effect can also
 induce constipation. Once constipation has developed, it may be complicated by an anal fissure,
 painful defecation, and further fecal retention. The consistency of the stool may vary. In some
 individuals the stool may be of normal or near-normal consistency. In other individuals—such as
 those with overflow incontinence secondary to fecal retention—it may be liquid.
 Associated Features
 The child with encopresis often feels ashamed and may wish to avoid situations (e.g., camp,
 school) that might lead to embarrassment. The amount of impairment is a function of the effect
 on the child's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment,
 and rejection on the part of caregivers. Smearing feces may be deliberate or accidental, resulting
 from the child’s attempt to clean or hide feces that were passed involuntarily. When the
 incontinence is clearly deliberate, features of oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder
 may also be present. Many children with encopresis and chronic constipation also have enuresis
 symptoms and may have associated urinary reflux in the bladder or ureters that may lead to
 chronic urinary infections, the symptoms of which may remit with treatment of the constipation.
 Prevalence
 It is estimated that the majority of children older than 4 years with encopresis have the subtype
 “with constipation and overflow incontinence.” Encopresis affects 1%–4% of children in high
income countries, while in some Asian countries (Iran, South Korea, Sri Lanka) a prevalence of
 2%–8% has been reported. Encopresis is more prevalent among children ages 4–6 years (> 4%)
 than among children ages 10–12 years (< 2%); prevalence is also higher among children who
 experience early abuse or neglect and low-income youth.
 Development and Course
 Encopresis is not diagnosed until a child has reached a chronological age of at least 4 years (or
 for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 4 years). Inadequate,
 404
 inconsistent toilet training and psychosocial stress (e.g., entering school, the birth of a sibling)
may be predisposing factors. Two types of course have been described: a “primary” type, in
 which the individual has never established fecal continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the
 disturbance develops after a period of established fecal continence. Encopresis can persist, with
 intermittent exacerbations, for years.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Painful defecation can lead to constipation and a cycle of withholding behaviors that make
 encopresis more likely. Male gender and age prior to adolescence are risk factors for encopresis.
 A number of factors are thought to contribute to the development of fecal incontinence,
 including anxiety, depression, behavioral disorders, psychological stressors (e.g., bullying, poor
 school performance), and lower socioeconomic status.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Differences in food and beverage intake in different cultures, hot climatic conditions in tropical
 countries, and psychosocial adversity may influence the incidence of constipation, unexplained
 abdominal pain, and fecal retention that lead to encopresis. Parents in some societies may not
 seek health services for encopresis because of sociocultural reasons. For example, Turkish and
 Moroccan parents in the Netherlands may not report encopresis because of religious concerns
 about the impurity of urine and feces.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 In children younger than 5 years, the gender ratio appears to be equal, but encopresis tends to be
 more common in boys than in girls among older children, with a ratio that varies globally (in
 community and hospital-based studies) from 2:1 (in the United States) to 6:1.
 Diagnostic Markers
 The diagnosis of encopresis is a clinical diagnosis based on history and physical examination and
 generally does not require any diagnostic testing. Detection of a rectal fecal impaction by digital
 rectal examination would support the diagnosis of encopresis, with constipation and overflow
 incontinence. Although not indicated for the diagnosis of encopresis, an abdominal radiograph
 demonstrating a fecal impaction would also support the diagnosis of encopresis, with
 constipation and overflow incontinence. Colonic transit testing, which typically involves
 ingestion of radiopaque markers followed by abdominal imaging to evaluate colonic transit time,
 can help differentiate between encopresis with or without constipation and overflow
 incontinence. Abdominal imaging demonstrating retention of radiopaque markers would suggest
 encopresis, with constipation and overflow incontinence, while prompt evacuation of radiopaque
 markers would support the diagnosis of encopresis, without constipation and overflow
 incontinence. In certain children, anorectal manometry testing may be helpful for better
 understanding physiological factors that may be contributing to encopresis. Anorectal
 manometry allows for evaluation of anorectal function and sensation. In the child with refractory
 symptoms or signs suggesting the presence of an underlying medical condition leading to fecal
 incontinence, further evaluation may be indicated. Such evaluation is designed to exclude other
 medical conditions.
Functional Consequences of Encopresis
 Encopresis is associated with a significant decrease in health-related quality of life and family
 functioning, particularly in older children.
 405
 Differential Diagnosis
 A diagnosis of encopresis in the presence of another medical condition is appropriate only if the
 mechanism involves constipation that cannot be explained by other medical conditions. Fecal
 incontinence related to other medical conditions (e.g., chronic diarrhea, spina bifida, anal
 stenosis) would not warrant a DSM-5 diagnosis of encopresis.
 Comorbidity
 Enuresis is often present in children with encopresis, particularly in children with encopresis,
 without constipation and overflow incontinence.