Transvestic Disorder
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
 cross-dressing, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
 B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Specify if:
 F65.1
With fetishism: If sexually aroused by fabrics, materials, or garments.
 With autogynephilia: If sexually aroused by thoughts or images of self as a
 woman.
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to cross-dress are
 restricted.
 In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 799
 Specifiers
 The presence of fetishism decreases the likelihood of gender dysphoria in men with transvestic
 disorder. The presence of autogynephilia increases the likelihood of gender dysphoria in men
 with transvestic disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnosis of transvestic disorder does not apply to all individuals who dress as the opposite
 sex, even those who do so habitually. It applies to individuals whose cross-dressing or thoughts
 of cross-dressing are always or often accompanied by sexual excitement (Criterion A) and who
 are emotionally distressed by this pattern or for whom it impairs their social or interpersonal
 functioning (Criterion B). The cross-dressing may involve only one or two articles of clothing
 (e.g., for men, it may pertain only to women’s undergarments), or it may involve dressing
 completely in the inner and outer garments of the other sex and (in men) may include the use of
 women’s wigs and makeup. Sexual arousal, in its most obvious form of penile erection, may co
occur with cross-dressing in various ways. In younger men, cross-dressing often leads to
 masturbation, following which any women’s clothing is removed. Older men often learn to avoid
 masturbating or doing anything to stimulate the penis so that the avoidance of ejaculation allows
 them to prolong their cross-dressing session. Men and women sometimes complete a cross
dressing session by having intercourse with their partners, and some have difficulty maintaining
 sufficient sexual arousal for sexual activity without cross-dressing (or having private fantasies of
 cross-dressing).
 Clinical assessment of distress or impairment, like clinical assessment of transvestic sexual
 arousal, is usually dependent on the individual’s self-report. The pattern of behavior “purging
 and acquisition” often signifies the presence of distress in individuals with transvestic disorder.
 During this behavioral pattern, an individual (usually a man) who has spent a great deal of
 money on women’s clothes and other apparel (e.g., shoes, wigs) discards the items (i.e., purges
 them) in an effort to overcome urges to cross-dress, and then begins acquiring a woman’s
 wardrobe all over again.
Associated Features
 Transvestic disorder in men is often accompanied by autogynephilia (i.e., a man’s paraphilic
 tendency to be sexually aroused by the thought or image of himself as a woman). Autogynephilic
 fantasies and behaviors may focus on the idea of exhibiting female physiological functions (e.g.,
 lactation, menstruation), engaging in stereotypically feminine behavior (e.g., knitting), or
 possessing female anatomy (e.g., breasts).
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of transvestic disorder is unknown; however, it appears to be much more
 prevalent in men than in women. Fewer than 3% of Swedish men report having ever been
 sexually aroused by dressing in women’s attire. The percentage of individuals who have cross
dressed with sexual arousal more than once or a few times in their lifetimes would be even
 lower.
 Development and Course
 In men, the first signs of transvestic disorder may begin in childhood, in the form of strong
 fascination with a particular item of women’s attire. Prior to puberty, cross-dressing produces
 generalized feelings of pleasurable excitement. With the arrival of puberty, dressing in women’s
 clothes begins to elicit penile erection and, in some cases, leads directly to first ejaculation. In
 many cases, cross-dressing elicits less and less sexual excitement as the individual grows older;
 eventually it may produce no discernible penile response at all. The desire to cross-dress, at the
 same time, remains the same or grows even stronger.
 800
 Individuals who report such a diminution of sexual response typically report that the sexual
 excitement of cross-dressing has been replaced by feelings of comfort or well-being.
 In some cases, the course of transvestic disorder is continuous, and in others it is episodic. It
 is not rare for men with transvestic disorder to lose interest in cross-dressing when they first fall
 in love with a woman and begin a relationship, but such abatement usually proves temporary.
 When the desire to cross-dress returns, so does the associated distress.
 Some cases of transvestic disorder progress to gender dysphoria. The men in these cases,
 who may be indistinguishable from others with transvestic disorder in adolescence or early
 childhood, gradually develop desires to remain in the woman’s role for longer periods and to
 feminize their anatomy. The development of gender dysphoria is usually accompanied by a (self
reported) reduction or elimination of sexual arousal in association with cross-dressing.
 The manifestation of transvestism in penile erection and stimulation, like the manifestation of
 other paraphilic as well as nonparaphilic sexual interests, is most intense in adolescence and
 early adulthood. The severity of transvestic disorder is highest in adulthood, when the transvestic
 drives are most likely to conflict with performance in heterosexual intercourse and desires to
 marry and start a family. Middle-age and older men with a history of transvestism are less likely
 to present with transvestic disorder than with gender dysphoria.
 Functional Consequences of Transvestic Disorder
Engaging in transvestic behaviors can interfere with, or detract from, heterosexual relationships.
 This can be a source of distress to men who wish to maintain conventional marriages or romantic
 partnerships with women.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Transvestism.
 Individuals with transvestism experience recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
 cross-dressing. Unless the fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving cross-dressing are
 accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
 important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of transvestic disorder is not warranted.
 Fetishistic disorder.
 This disorder may resemble transvestic disorder, in particular, in men with
 fetishism who put on women’s undergarments while masturbating with them. Distinguishing
 transvestic disorder depends on the individual’s specific thoughts during such activity (e.g., are
 there any ideas of being a woman, being like a woman, or being dressed as a woman?) and on
 the presence of other fetishes (e.g., soft, silky fabrics, whether these are used for garments or for
 something else).
 Gender dysphoria.
 Individuals with transvestic disorder do not report an incongruence between
 their experienced gender and their assigned gender or a desire to be of the other gender; and they
 typically do not have a history of childhood cross-gender behaviors, which would be present in
 individuals with gender dysphoria. Individuals with a presentation that meets full criteria for
 transvestic disorder as well as gender dysphoria should be given both diagnoses.
 Comorbidity
 Transvestic disorder is often found in association with other paraphilias. The most frequently co
occurring paraphilias are fetishistic sexual interests or behavior and masochistic sexual interests
 or behavior. One particularly dangerous form of masochistic sexual interests or behavior,
 autoerotic asphyxia, is associated with transvestic sexual interests or behavior in a substantial
 proportion of fatal cases.
 801