Pedophilic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
 fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a
 prepubescent child or children (generally age 13 years or younger).
 B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges, or the sexual urges or fantasies
 cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
 793
C. The individual is at least age 16 years and at least 5 years older than the child or
 children in Criterion A.
 Note: Do not include an individual in late adolescence involved in an ongoing
 sexual relationship with a 12- or 13-year-old.
 Specify whether:
 Exclusive type (attracted only to children)
 Nonexclusive type
 Specify if:
 Sexually attracted to males
 Sexually attracted to females
 Sexually attracted to both
 Specify if:
 Limited to incest
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic criteria for pedophilic disorder are intended to apply both to individuals who
 freely disclose this paraphilia and to individuals who deny any sexual attraction to prepubertal
 children (generally age 13 years or younger), despite substantial objective evidence to the
 contrary. The age guideline of 13 or younger is approximate only, because the onset of puberty
 varies from person to person, and there is good evidence the average age at onset of puberty has
 been declining over time and differs across ethnicities and cultures. Examples of disclosing this
 paraphilia include candidly acknowledging an intense sexual interest in children and indicating
 that sexual interest in children is greater than or equal to sexual interest in physically mature
 persons. If individuals also complain that their sexual attractions or preferences for children are
 causing marked distress or psychosocial difficulties, they may be diagnosed with pedophilic
 disorder. However, if they report an absence of feelings of guilt, shame, or anxiety about these
 impulses and are not functionally limited by their paraphilic impulses (according to self-report,
 objective assessment, or both), and their self-reported and legally recorded histories indicate that
 they have never acted on their impulses, then these individuals have a pedophilic sexual interest
 but not pedophilic disorder. When trying to differentiate child offenders with pedophilic disorder
 from child offenders without pedophilic disorder, factors that suggest a diagnosis of pedophilic
 disorder in the offender include self-reported interest in children, use of child pornography, a
 history of multiple child victims, boy victims, and unrelated child victims.
 Examples of individuals who deny attraction to children include individuals who are known
 to have sexually approached multiple children on separate occasions but who deny any urges or
 fantasies about sexual behavior involving children, and who may further claim that the known
 episodes of physical contact were all unintentional and nonsexual. Other individuals may
 acknowledge past episodes of sexual behavior involving children but deny any significant or
 sustained sexual interest in children. Because these individuals may deny experiences, impulses,
 or fantasies involving children, they may also deny feeling subjectively distressed. Such
 individuals may still be diagnosed with pedophilic disorder despite the absence of self-reported
distress, provided that there is evidence of recurrent behaviors persisting for 6 months (Criterion
 A) and evidence that the individual has acted on sexual urges or experienced interpersonal
 difficulties as a consequence of the disorder (Criterion B). Behaviors include sexual interactions
 with children, whether or not they involve physical contact (e.g., some pedophilic individuals
 expose themselves to children). Although the use of sexually explicit content depicting
 prepubescent children is typical of individuals with pedophilic sexual interests and thus might
 contribute important information relevant to the evaluation of Criterion A, such behavior in the
 absence of the individual’s sexual interactions with children (i.e., acting on these sexual urges in
 person) is insufficient to conclude that Criterion B is met.
 794
 Presence of multiple victims, as discussed above, is sufficient but not necessary for
 diagnosis; that is, the individual can still meet Criterion A by merely acknowledging intense or
 preferential sexual interest in children.
 Associated Features
 Individuals with pedophilic disorder may experience an emotional and cognitive affinity with
 children, sometimes referred to as emotional congruence with children. Emotional congruence
 with children can manifest in different ways, including preferring social interactions with
 children over adults, feeling like one has more in common with children than with adults, and
 choosing occupations or volunteer roles in order to be around children more often. Studies show
 that emotional congruence with children is related to both pedophilic sexual interest and the
 likelihood of sexually reoffending among individuals who have sexually offended.
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
 pedophilic disorder is unknown but is likely less than 3% among men in international studies.
 The population prevalence of pedophilic disorder in women is even more uncertain, but it is
 likely a small fraction of the prevalence in men.
 Development and Course
 Adult men with pedophilic disorder may indicate that they became aware of strong or
 preferential sexual interest in children around the time of puberty—the same time frame in which
 men who later prefer physically mature partners became aware of their sexual interest in women
 or men. Attempting to diagnose pedophilic disorder at the age at which it first manifests is
 problematic because of the difficulty during adolescent development in differentiating it from
 age-appropriate sexual interest in peers or from sexual curiosity. Hence, Criterion C requires for
 diagnosis a minimum age of 16 years and at least 5 years older than the child or children in
 Criterion A.
 Pedophilia per se appears to be a lifelong condition. Pedophilic disorder, however,
 necessarily includes other elements that may change over time with or without treatment:
 subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, or feelings of isolation) or
 psychosocial impairment, or the propensity to act out sexually with children, or both. Therefore,
the course of pedophilic disorder may fluctuate, or the intensity might increase or decrease with
 age.
 Adults with pedophilic disorder may report an awareness of sexual interest in children that
 preceded engaging in sexual behavior involving children or self-identification as an individual
 with pedophilia. Advanced age is as likely to similarly diminish the frequency of sexual behavior
 involving children as it does other paraphilically motivated and nonparaphilic sexual behavior.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 There appears to be an interaction between pedophilia and antisocial personality
 traits such as callousness, impulsivity, and a willingness to take risks without adequate regard for
 the consequences. Men with pedophilic interest and antisocial personality traits are more likely
 to act out sexually with children and thus qualify for a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder. Thus,
 antisocial personality disorder may be considered a risk factor for pedophilic disorder in males
 with pedophilia.
 Environmental.
 Adult men with pedophilia sometimes report that they were sexually abused as
 children. It is unclear, however, whether this correlation reflects a causal influence of childhood
 sexual abuse on adult pedophilia.
 795
 Genetic and physiological.
 Since pedophilia is a necessary condition for pedophilic disorder, any
 factor that increases the probability of pedophilia also increases the risk of pedophilic disorder.
 There is some evidence that neurodevelopmental perturbation in utero increases the probability
 of development of a pedophilic interest.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Laboratory measures of sexual interest, in terms of psychophysiological responses to sexual
 stimuli depicting children, which are sometimes useful in diagnosing pedophilic disorder in men,
 are not necessarily useful in diagnosing this disorder in women because there has been very
 limited research on the assessment of pedophilic sexual interest in women.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Psychophysiological measures of sexual interest may sometimes be useful when an individual’s
 history suggests the possible presence of pedophilic disorder but the individual denies strong or
 preferential attraction to children. The most thoroughly researched and longest used of such
 measures is penile plethysmography, although the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis may
 vary across sites, which frequently use different stimuli, procedures, and scoring. Viewing time,
 using photographs of nude or minimally clothed persons as visual stimuli, is also used to
 diagnose pedophilic disorder, especially in combination with self-report measures. U.S.
 clinicians, however, should be aware that possession of visual sexual stimuli depicting children,
 even for diagnostic purposes, may violate American law regarding possession of child
 pornography and leave the clinician susceptible to criminal prosecution. The option exists to use
 audio stimuli describing sexual interactions in penile plethysmography. Across
 psychophysiological methods, the diagnostic marker is relative sexual response to stimuli
depicting children compared with stimuli depicting adults, rather than absolute response to child
 stimuli.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Pedophilia.
 Individuals with pedophilia experience recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies
 or sexual urges involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children. Unless the
 individual has acted on these sexual urges with a prepubescent child or unless the sexual urges or
 fantasies cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty, a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder is
 not warranted.
 Other paraphilic disorders.
 Sometimes individuals present with a different paraphilic disorder but
 are referred for an evaluation regarding possible pedophilic disorder (e.g., when an individual
 with a diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder exposes himself to children as well as adults). In
 some cases, both diagnoses may apply, whereas in others, it may be the case that one paraphilic
 disorder diagnosis is sufficient. For example, an individual who exposes himself exclusively to
 prepubescent children may have both exhibitionistic disorder and pedophilic disorder, whereas
 another individual who exposes himself to victims, irrespective of the victims’ age, may be
 considered to have only exhibitionistic disorder.
 Antisocial personality disorder.
 Some individuals with antisocial personality disorder sexually
 abuse children, reflecting the fact that the presence of antisocial personality disorder increases
 the likelihood that an individual who is primarily attracted to mature persons will approach a
 child sexually, on the basis of relative access to the child. An additional diagnosis of pedophilic
 disorder should only be considered if there is evidence that over a period of at least 6 months, the
 individual has also had recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors
 involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child.
 796
 Substance intoxication.
 The disinhibiting effects of substance intoxication may also increase the
 likelihood that an individual who is primarily attracted to mature persons will sexually approach
 a child.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
 There are occasional individuals who complain about ego
dystonic thoughts and worries about possible attraction to children. Clinical interviewing usually
 reveals an absence of positive feelings about these thoughts, no connection between these
 thoughts and sexual behavior (e.g., masturbating to these thoughts), and sometimes additional
 ego-dystonic, intrusive sexual ideas (e.g., concerns about homosexuality).
 Comorbidity
 Psychiatric comorbidity of pedophilic disorder includes substance use disorders; depressive,
 bipolar, and anxiety disorders; antisocial personality disorder; and other paraphilic disorders.
 However, findings on comorbid disorders are largely among individuals convicted for sexual
 offenses involving children (almost all males) and may not be generalizable to other individuals
 with pedophilic disorder (e.g., individuals who have never approached a child sexually but who
 qualify for the diagnosis of pedophilic disorder on the basis of subjective distress).
