 Sexual Sadism Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the
 physical or psychological suffering of another person, as manifested by
 fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
 B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
 the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 F65.52
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in sadistic
 sexual behaviors are restricted.
 In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
 nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic criteria for sexual sadism disorder are intended to apply both to individuals who
 freely admit to having such paraphilic interests and to those who deny any sexual interest in the
physical or psychological suffering of another individual despite substantial objective evidence
 to the contrary. Individuals who openly acknowledge intense sexual interest in the physical or
 psychological suffering of others are referred to as “admitting individuals.” If these individuals
 also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for the
 physical or psychological suffering of another individual, they may be diagnosed with sexual
 sadism disorder. In contrast, if admitting individuals declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety,
 obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them in
 pursuing other goals, and their self-reported, psychiatric, or legal histories indicate that they do
 not act on them with nonconsenting persons, then they could be ascertained as having sadistic
 sexual interest but their presentation would not meet criteria for sexual sadism disorder.
 Examples of individuals who deny any interest in the physical or psychological suffering of
 another individual include individuals known to have inflicted pain or suffering on multiple
 victims on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies about such sexual behavior
 and who may further claim that known episodes of sexual assault were either unintentional or
 nonsexual. Others may admit past episodes of sexual behavior involving the infliction of pain or
 suffering on a nonconsenting person but do not report any significant or sustained sexual interest
 in the physical or psychological suffering of another person. Since these individuals deny having
 urges or fantasies involving sexual arousal to pain and suffering, it follows that they would also
 deny feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. Such individuals may
 be diagnosed with sexual sadism disorder despite their negative self-report. Their recurrent
 behavior constitutes clinical support for the presence of the paraphilia of sexual sadism (by
 satisfying Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that their paraphilically motivated
 behavior is causing clinically significant distress, harm, or risk of harm to others (satisfying
 Criterion B).
 791
 “Recurrent” sexual sadism involving nonconsenting others may be interpreted as requiring
 multiple victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement for multiple victims on separate
 occasions is relevant because it increases the confidence in the clinical inference that the
 individual is motivated by sexual sadism disorder. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying
 this criterion, if there are multiple instances of infliction of pain and suffering to the same victim,
 or if there is corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in pain and suffering
 involving multiple victims. Note that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but
 not a necessary condition for diagnosis, as the criteria may be met if the individual acknowledges
 intense sadistic sexual interest.
 The term bondage-domination-sadism-masochism (BDSM) is broadly used to refer to a wide
 range of behaviors that individuals with sexual masochism and/or sexual sadism (as well as other
 individuals with similar sexual interests) engage in, such as restraints or restriction, discipline,
 spanking, slapping, sensory deprivation (e.g., using blindfolds), and dominance-submission role
play involving themes such as master/enslaved person, owner/pet, or kidnapper/victim.
 Associated Features
 The extensive use of pornography involving the infliction of pain and suffering is sometimes an
associated feature of sexual sadism disorder.
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for sexual
 sadism disorder is unknown and is largely based on individuals in forensic settings. Among
 civilly committed sexual offenders in the United States, less than 10% have sexual sadism
 disorder. Among individuals who have committed sexually motivated homicides, the proportion
 of sexually sadistic behavior is about one-third.
 Individuals with sexual sadism disorder in forensic samples are almost exclusively men, but a
 representative sample of the population in Australia reported that 2.2% of men and 1.3% of
 women said that they had been involved in BDSM behavior in the previous year. In a
 population-based sample in Finland, the lifetime prevalence for sexually sadistic behavior was
 2.7% among men and 2.3% among women.
 Development and Course
 Information on the development and course of sexual sadism disorder is extremely limited.
 Whereas sexually sadistic preferences per se are probably a lifelong characteristic, sexual sadism
 disorder may fluctuate according to the individual’s subjective distress or his or her propensity to
 harm nonconsenting others. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated
 with decreasing sexually sadistic preferences and behavior. Regarding sexually sadistic
 preference, many individuals who engage in BDSM behavior became aware of their
 corresponding interest in their teenage years.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The legal status of sexually sadistic behavior ranges across countries and societies, suggesting
 the potential for variation in distress (because of variation in cultural acceptance) and functional
 impairment (because of legal status).
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Association of sexual sadism disorder with suicidal thoughts or behavior is unknown. However,
 a study of 321 adults who endorsed BDSM involvement found an association of stigma-related
 shame and guilt with suicidal ideation.
 792
 Differential Diagnosis
 Sexual sadism.
 Individuals with sexual sadism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from
 the physical or psychological suffering of another person. Unless the sexual urges to make
 another person suffer physically or psychologically are acted on with a non-consenting person, or
 unless there is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
 or other important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder is not warranted.
 The majority of individuals who are active in community networks that practice sadistic and
 masochistic behaviors do not express any dissatisfaction with their sexual interests, and their
Infliction of physical or psychological suffering during the commission of a sex crime.
 Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
 F65.4
 behavior would not meet DSM-5 criteria for sexual sadism disorder.
 Individuals who
 commit rape or other sexual assaults might inflict pain on their victims as a result of the act of
 rape, or in the course of subduing victims or restraining them to commit the sexual assault. Such
 instrumental infliction of pain should not be considered to be indicative of sexual sadism
 disorder unless there is evidence that the individual is deriving pleasure from the infliction of
 pain and the resulting suffering of the victim (e.g., admission of specifically being aroused by the
 pain, evidence of a preference for pornography involving themes of sexual sadism, excessive use
 of pain-inducing violence that goes beyond what might be necessary in the course of committing
 the sexual assault).
 Individuals with conduct disorder and
 antisocial personality disorder may be physically cruel to people and force others to engage in
 sexual activity. Coercive or sadistic sexual behaviors that occur in the context of conduct
 disorder or antisocial personality disorder but that do not reflect an underlying pattern of sexual
 arousal from the physical or psychological suffering of another person should not be used as a
 basis for diagnosing sexual sadism disorder. In cases in which the diagnostic criteria are met for
 both sexual sadism disorder and conduct disorder/antisocial personality disorder, both disorders
 may be diagnosed.
 Comorbidity
 Known comorbidities with sexual sadism disorder are largely based on individuals (almost all
 men) convicted for criminal acts involving sadistic acts against nonconsenting victims. Hence,
 these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who never engaged in sadistic activity with
 a nonconsenting victim but who qualify for a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder based on
 subjective distress over their sexual interest. Disorders that are commonly comorbid with sexual
 sadism disorder include other paraphilic disorders. According to a population-based study in
 Finland, individuals who had engaged in sexually sadistic behavior had also engaged in other
 types of paraphilic behavior, namely (in descending order of co-occurrence) masochism (68.8%),
 voyeurism (33.3%), transvestic fetishism (9.2%), and exhibitionism (6.4%).