Frotteuristic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
 touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies,
 urges, or behaviors.
 B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
 the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 786
 F65.81
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to touch or rub against
 a nonconsenting person are restricted.
 In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
 nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 Specifiers
 The “in remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of frotteurism
 per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who relatively
 freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who firmly deny any sexual arousal from touching or
 rubbing against a nonconsenting person regardless of considerable objective evidence to the
 contrary. If disclosing individuals also report psychosocial impairment because of their sexual
 preferences for touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, they could be diagnosed
 with frotteuristic disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress (demonstrated by lack of
 anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame) about these paraphilic impulses and are not impaired in
 other important areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their psychiatric or legal
 histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as having frotteuristic
sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder.
 Nondisclosing individuals include, for instance, individuals known to have been touching or
 rubbing against nonconsenting persons on separate occasions but who contest any urges or
 fantasies concerning such sexual behavior. Such individuals may report that identified episodes
 of touching or rubbing against an unwilling individual were all unintentional and nonsexual.
 Others may disclose past episodes of touching or rubbing against nonconsenting persons but
 contest any major or persistent sexual interest in this. Since these individuals deny having
 fantasies or impulses about touching or rubbing, they would consequently reject feeling
 distressed or psychosocially impaired by such impulses. Despite their nondisclosing position,
 such individuals may be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder. Recurrent frotteuristic behavior
 constitutes satisfactory support for frotteurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and concurrently
 demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling
 Criterion B).
 “Recurrent” touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person may be interpreted as
 requiring multiple victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement for multiple victims on
 separate occasions is relevant because it increases the confidence in the clinical inference that the
 individual is motivated by frotteuristic disorder. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying
 this criterion if there were multiple occasions of touching or rubbing against the same unwilling
 individual, or corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in touching or rubbing
 against nonconsenting persons. Note that multiple victims are a sufficient but not a necessary
 condition for diagnosis; criteria may also be met if the individual acknowledges intense
 frotteuristic sexual interest with clinically significant distress and/or impairment.
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
 frotteuristic disorder is unknown, but frotteuristic acts, including the uninvited sexual touching of
 or rubbing against another individual, may occur in up to 30% of adult men in the U.S. and
 Canadian general population. Prevalence of frotteuristic disorder is certainly
 787
 much lower, considering the finding that “intense desire” and “persistent behavior” were
 reported infrequently (3.8% and 0.7%, respectively). In outpatient settings for men with
 paraphilic disorders and hypersexuality, approximately 10%–14% have a presentation that meets
 diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disorder. Prevalence among women is likely lower.
 Development and Course
 Adult men with frotteuristic disorder often report first becoming aware of their sexual interest in
 surreptitiously touching unsuspecting persons during late adolescence or emerging adulthood.
 However, children and adolescents may also touch or rub against unwilling others in the absence
 of a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder. Although there is no minimum age for the diagnosis,
 frotteuristic disorder can be difficult to differentiate from conduct-disordered behavior without
 sexual motivation in individuals at younger ages. The persistence of frotteurism over time is
 unclear. With or without treatment of frotteuristic disorder, the subjective distress (e.g., guilt,
shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change over
 time, as may a number of factors that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such as
 psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course may
 vary over time. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with
 decreasing frotteuristic sexual preferences and behavior.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Nonsexual antisocial behavior and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality might be
 nonspecific risk factors, although the causal relationship to frotteurism is uncertain and the
 specificity unclear. However, because frotteurism is a necessary precondition for frotteuristic
 disorder, risk factors for frotteurism should also increase the risk of frotteuristic disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Frotteurism.
 Individuals with frotteurism experience recurrent intense sexual arousal from the act
 of touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person. Unless the individual acts on these urges
 with a nonconsenting person (e.g., rubbing his genitals against a passenger on a crowded subway
 car) or unless there is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder is not
 warranted.
 Manic episode, major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, personality
 change due to another medical condition, substance intoxication, and schizophrenia.
 Individuals with a major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder,
 personality change due to another medical condition, or schizophrenia, or who are in a manic
 episode or experiencing substance intoxication, may become sexually disinhibited or have
 impaired judgment or impulse control and engage in frotteuris-tic behavior. Unless that behavior
 occurs at times other than in the context of one of these disorders, a diagnosis of frotteuristic
 disorder should not be made.
 Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
 Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial
 personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial
 behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person
 will usually be lacking.
 Comorbidity
 Known comorbidities in frotteuristic disorder are largely based on research with men suspected
 of or convicted for criminal acts involving sexually motivated touching of or
 788
 rubbing against a nonconsenting person. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to other
 individuals with a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder based on subjective distress over their sexual
 interest. Conditions that occur comorbidly with frotteuristic disorder include hypersexuality and
 other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder and voyeuristic disorder. Conduct
 disorder, antisocial personality disorder, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, anxiety
 disorders, and substance use disorders also co-occur.
