 Exhibitionistic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the
 exposure of one’s genitals to an unsuspecting person, as manifested by
 fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
 B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
 the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Specify whether:
 Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children
 Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to physically mature individuals
 Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children and to
 physically mature individuals
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to expose one’s
 genitals are restricted.
 In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
 nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 Subtypes
 The subtypes for exhibitionistic disorder are based on the age or physical maturity of the
 nonconsenting persons to whom the individual prefers to expose his or her genitals. The
 nonconsenting persons could be prepubescent children, adults, or both. This specifier should help
 draw adequate attention to characteristics of victims of individuals with exhibitionistic disorder
 to prevent co-occurring pedophilic disorder from being overlooked. However, indications that
 the individual with exhibitionistic disorder is sexually attracted to exposing his or her genitals to
 children should not preclude a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder.
 Specifiers
 The “in full remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of
 exhibitionism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic criteria for exhibitionistic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less
 freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal from
 exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons despite substantial objective evidence to the
 contrary. If disclosing individuals also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual
 attractions or preferences for exposing, they may be diagnosed with exhibitionistic
 784
disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress (exemplified by absence of anxiety, obsessions,
 and guilt or shame about these paraphilic impulses) and are not impaired by this sexual interest
 in other important areas of functioning, and their self-reported, psychiatric, or legal histories
 indicate that they do not act on them, they could be ascertained as having exhibitionistic sexual
 interest but not be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder.
 Examples of nondisclosing individuals include those who have exposed themselves
 repeatedly to unsuspecting persons on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies
 about such sexual behavior and who report that known episodes of exposure were all accidental
 and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of sexual behavior involving genital exposure
 but refute any significant or sustained sexual interest in such behavior. Since these individuals
 deny having urges or fantasies involving genital exposure, it follows that they would also deny
 feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. Such individuals may be
 diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder despite their negative self-report. Recurrent
 exhibitionistic behavior constitutes sufficient support for exhibitionism (Criterion A) and
 simultaneously demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to
 others (Criterion B).
 “Recurrent” genital exposure to unsuspecting others may be interpreted as requiring multiple
 victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement for multiple victims on separate occasions
 is relevant because it increases the confidence in the clinical inference that the individual is
 motivated by exhibitionistic disorder. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion
 if there were multiple occasions of exposure to the same victim, or if there is corroborating
 evidence of a strong or preferential interest in genital exposure to unsuspecting persons. Note
 that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for
 diagnosis, as criteria may be met by an individual’s acknowledging intense exhibitionistic sexual
 interest with distress or impairment.
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
 exhibitionistic disorder is unknown, although the disorder is highly unusual in women.
 Exhibitionistic acts, however, are not uncommon, and single sexually arousing exhibitionistic
 acts occur up to half as often among women compared with men. In a Quebec Internet and phone
 survey sample, lifetime prevalence of exhibitionistic behaviors was reported to be 30.9% (32.6%
 in men, 29.4% in women). Because this same study found that an “intense desire” and “persistent
 behavior” occur with much less frequency (4.8% and 0.8%, respectively), the prevalence of
 exhibitionistic disorder is likely much lower. For example, a Swedish study suggested that the
 lifetime prevalence of exhibitionistic disorder in the general population was 4.1% in men and
 2.1% in women.
 Development and Course
 Adult men with exhibitionistic disorder often report that they first became aware of sexual
 interest in exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons during adolescence, at a somewhat
 later time than the typical development of normative sexual interest in women or men. Although
 there is no minimum age requirement for the diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder, it may be
 difficult to differentiate exhibitionistic behaviors from age-appropriate sexual curiosity in
adolescents. Whereas exhibitionistic impulses appear to emerge in adolescence or early
 adulthood, very little is known about persistence over time. With or without treatment of
 exhibitionistic disorder, the subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration,
 loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change over time, as may a number of factors
 that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such as psychiatric morbidity,
 hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course may vary over time. As
 with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with decreasing exhibitionistic
 sexual preferences and behavior.
 785
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Because exhibitionism is a necessary precondition for exhibitionistic disorder,
 risk factors for exhibitionism should also increase the risk of exhibitionistic disorder. Antisocial
 history, antisocial personality disorder, alcohol misuse, and pedophilic sexual preference might
 increase risk of sexual recidivism in exhibitionistic offenders. Hence, antisocial personality
 disorder, alcohol use disorder, and pedophilic interest may be considered risk factors for
 exhibitionistic disorder in men with exhibitionistic sexual preferences.
 Environmental.
 Childhood sexual and emotional abuse and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality
 have been suggested as risk factors for exhibitionism, although the causal relationship to
 exhibitionism is uncertain and the specificity unclear.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Exhibitionism.
 Individuals with exhibitionism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from
 the act of exposing their genitals to an unsuspecting person. Unless the individual acts on these
 urges with an unsuspecting person (e.g., exposing his genitals to riders on a train) or unless there
 is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
 important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder is not warranted.
 Manic episode, major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, personality
 change due to another medical condition, substance intoxication, and schizophrenia.
 Individuals with a major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder,
 personality change due to another medical condition, or schizophrenia, or who are in a manic
 episode or experiencing substance intoxication, may become sexually disinhibited or have
 impaired judgment or impulse control and engage in exhibitionistic behavior. Unless that
 behavior occurs at times other than in the context of one of these disorders, a diagnosis of
 exhibitionistic disorder should not be made.
 Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
 Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial
 personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial
 behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in exposing the genitals will usually be lacking.
 Comorbidity
 Known comorbidities in exhibitionistic disorder are largely based on research with individuals
 (almost all men) convicted for criminal acts involving genital exposure to nonconsenting
 persons. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who qualify for a
diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with exhibitionistic
 disorder at high rates include depressive, bipolar, anxiety, and substance use disorders;
 hypersexuality; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; other paraphilic disorders; and antisocial
 personality disorder.