 Voyeuristic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
 observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or
 engaging in sexual activity, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
 F65.3
 B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The individual experiencing the arousal and/or acting on the urges is at least 18
 years of age.
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in
 voyeuristic behavior are restricted.
 In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
 nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 781
 Specifiers
 The “in full remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of
 voyeurism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic criteria for voyeuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less
 freely disclose this paraphilic interest and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal
 from observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, disrobing, or engaged in sexual activity
 despite substantial objective evidence to the contrary. If disclosing individuals also report
 distress or psychosocial problems because of their voyeuristic sexual preferences, they could be
 diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. On the other hand, if they declare no distress, demonstrated
 by lack of anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses and are not
 impaired in other important areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their
 psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as
 having voyeuristic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder.
 Nondisclosing individuals include, for example, individuals known to have been spying
 repeatedly on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity on separate
 occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies concerning such sexual behavior, and who may
 report that known episodes of watching unsuspecting naked or sexually active persons were all
 accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of observing unsuspecting naked or
 sexually active persons but contest any significant or sustained sexual interest in this behavior.
 Since these individuals deny having fantasies or impulses about watching others nude or
 involved in sexual activity, it follows that they would also reject feeling subjectively distressed
 or socially impaired by such impulses. Despite their nondisclosing stance, such individuals may
 be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. Recurrent voyeuristic behavior constitutes sufficient
 support for voyeurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that this
 paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling Criterion B).
 “Recurrent” spying on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity
may be interpreted as requiring multiple victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement
 for multiple victims on separate occasions is relevant because it increases the confidence in the
 clinical inference that the individual is motivated by voyeuristic disorder. Fewer victims can be
 interpreted as satisfying this criterion if there were multiple occasions of watching the same
 victim or if there is corroborating evidence of a distinct or preferential interest in secret watching
 of naked or sexually active unsuspecting persons. Note that multiple victims, as suggested
 earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for diagnosis; the criteria may also be met if
 the individual acknowledges intense voyeuristic sexual interest.
 Adolescence and puberty generally increase sexual curiosity and activity. To reduce the risk
 of pathologizing normative sexual interest and behavior during pubertal adolescence, the
 minimum age for the diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years (Criterion C).
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
 voyeuristic disorder is unknown. Voyeuristic acts, however, are the most common of potentially
 law-breaking sexual behaviors. For example, in a Quebec Internet and phone survey sample, the
 lifetime prevalence of voyeuristic behaviors was reported to be as high as 34.5% (50.3% in men,
 21.2% in women). Because this same study found that an “intense desire” and “persistent
 behavior” occur with much less frequency (9.6% and 2.1%, respectively), the prevalence of
 voyeuristic disorder is likely much lower. The ratio of voyeuristic behavior in men to women
 was approximately 2:1 in the Quebec sample and 3:1 in a Swedish general population sample. In
 a study determining which particular disorders were prevalent
 782
 in individuals incarcerated for sexual offenses, a study of 1,346 incarcerated sex offenders from
 Austria found a prevalence of voyeuristic disorder of 3.7%.
 Development and Course
 Adult men with voyeuristic disorder often first become aware of their sexual interest in secretly
 watching unsuspecting persons during adolescence. However, the minimum age for a diagnosis
 of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years because there is substantial difficulty in differentiating it from
 age-appropriate puberty-related sexual curiosity and activity. The persistence of voyeurism over
 time is unclear. With or without treatment of voyeuristic disorder, the subjective distress (e.g.,
 guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change
 over time, as may a number of factors that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such
 as psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course
 may vary over time. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with
 decreasing voyeuristic sexual preferences and behavior.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Environmental.
 Because voyeurism is a necessary precondition for voyeuristic disorder, risk
 factors for voyeurism should also increase the risk of voyeuristic disorder.
 Childhood 
sexual 
abuse, 
substance 
misuse, 
and 
sexual
Voyeurism.
 Manic episode, major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, personality
 change due to another medical condition, substance intoxication, and schizophrenia.
 Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
 F65.2
 preoccupation/hypersexuality have been suggested as risk factors, although the causal
 relationship to voyeuristic behavior is uncertain and the specificity unclear.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Voyeuristic disorder is very uncommon among women in clinical settings, whereas the ratio in
 men to women for single sexually arousing voyeuristic acts is less extreme and may be 2:1–3:1.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Individuals with voyeurism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from the act
 of observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in
 sexual activity. Unless the individual acts on these urges with an unsuspecting person (e.g.,
 surreptitiously peeping through a neighbor’s window) or unless there is accompanying clinically
 significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning,
 a diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is not warranted.
 Individuals with a major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder,
 personality change due to another medical condition, or schizophrenia, or who are in a manic
 episode or experiencing substance intoxication, may become sexually disinhibited or have
 impaired judgment or impulse control and engage in voyeuristic behavior. Unless that behavior
 occurs at times other than in the context of one of these disorders, a diagnosis of voyeuristic
 disorder should not be made.
 Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial
 personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial
 behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting others who are
 naked or engaging in sexual activity will usually be lacking.
 Comorbidity
 Known comorbidities in voyeuristic disorder are largely based on research with males suspected
 of or convicted for acts involving the secret watching of unsuspecting nude or
 783
 sexually active persons. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals with
 voyeuristic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with voyeuristic disorder include
 hypersexuality and other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder. Depressive,
 bipolar, anxiety, and substance use disorders; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; and
 conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder are also frequent comorbid conditions.