Fetishistic Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
 either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on nongenital body
 part(s), as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
 B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The fetish objects are not limited to articles of clothing used in cross-dressing (as
 in transvestic disorder) or devices specifically designed for the purpose of tactile
 genital stimulation (e.g., vibrator).
 Specify:
 Body part(s)
 Nonliving object(s)
 Other
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in fetishistic
 behaviors are restricted.
 In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 Specifiers
 Although individuals with fetishistic disorder may report intense and recurrent sexual arousal to
 inanimate objects or a specific body part, it is not unusual for non–mutually exclusive
 combinations of fetishistic sexual interests to occur. Thus, an individual may have fetishistic
 disorder associated with an inanimate object (e.g., female undergarments) or an exclusive focus
 on an intensely eroticized body part (e.g., feet, hair), or his or her fetishistic interest may meet
 criteria for various combinations of these specifiers (e.g., socks, shoes, and feet).
 797
 Diagnostic Features
 The paraphilic focus of fetishistic disorder involves the persistent and repetitive use of or
 dependence on nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on a (typically nongenital) body part
 as a primary element associated with sexual arousal (Criterion A). A diagnosis of fetishistic
 disorder must include clinically significant personal distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). Common fetish objects
include women’s undergarments, men’s or women’s footwear, rubber articles, leather clothing,
 diapers, or other wearing apparel. Highly eroticized body parts associated with fetishistic
 disorder include feet, toes, and hair. It is not uncommon for sexualized fetishes to include both
 inanimate objects and body parts (e.g., dirty socks and feet), and for this reason the definition of
 fetishistic disorder now re-incorporates partialism (i.e., an exclusive focus on a body part) into
 its boundaries. Partialism, previously considered in DSM-IV-TR to be a paraphilia not otherwise
 specified, had historically been subsumed in fetishism prior to DSM-III.
 Many individuals who self-identify as fetishist practitioners do not necessarily report clinical
 impairment in association with their fetish-associated behaviors. Such individuals could be
 considered as having a fetishistic sexual interest (i.e., a recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
 either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on a nongenital body part, as
 manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors), but not fetishistic disorder. A diagnosis of
 fetishistic disorder requires concurrent fulfillment of both the behaviors in Criterion A and the
 clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning noted in Criterion B.
 Associated Features
 Fetishistic disorder can be a multisensory experience, including holding, tasting, rubbing,
 inserting, or smelling the fetish object while masturbating, or preferring that a sexual partner
 wear or utilize a fetish object during sexual encounters. It should be noted that many individuals
 with fetishistic sexual interests also enjoy sexual experiences with their partner(s) without using
 their fetish object. However, it should also be noted that individuals with a fetishistic sexual
 interest often find that sexual experiences that involve their fetish object are more sexually
 satisfying than sexual experience without it. And for a minority of people with a fetishistic
 sexual interest, their fetish object is obligatory to becoming sexually aroused and/or satisfied.
 Some individuals may acquire extensive collections of highly desired fetish objects.
 Development and Course
 Usually paraphilias have an onset during puberty, but fetishistic sexual interests can develop
 prior to adolescence. Once established, fetishistic disorder tends to have a continuous course that
 fluctuates in intensity and frequency of urges or behavior.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Knowledge of and appropriate consideration for normative aspects of sexual behavior are
 important factors to explore to establish a clinical diagnosis of fetishistic disorder and to
 distinguish a clinical diagnosis from a socially acceptable sexual behavior.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Fetishistic behaviors have been reported more in men, but also occur in women. This gender
 difference is smaller for fetishistic fantasy than for actual fetishistic behavior. In clinical samples,
 fetishistic disorder is nearly exclusively reported in men.
 Functional Consequences of Fetishistic Disorder
 Typical impairments associated with fetishistic disorder include sexual dysfunction during
romantic reciprocal relationships when the preferred fetish object or body part is
 798
 unavailable during foreplay or coitus. Some individuals with fetishistic disorder may prefer
 solitary sexual activity associated with their fetishistic preference(s) even while involved in a
 meaningful reciprocal and affectionate relationship.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Transvestic disorder.
 The nearest diagnostic neighbor of fetishistic disorder is transvestic
 disorder. As noted in the diagnostic criteria, fetishistic disorder is not diagnosed when fetish
 objects are limited to articles of clothing exclusively worn during cross-dressing (as in
 transvestic disorder), or when the object is genitally stimulating because it has been designed for
 that purpose (e.g., a vibrator).
 Sexual masochism disorder or other paraphilic disorders.
 Fetishistic disorder can co-occur with other
 paraphilic disorders, especially sadomasochistic behavior or interests and transvestic disorder.
 When an individual fantasizes about or engages in “forced cross-dressing” and is primarily
 sexually aroused by the domination or humiliation associated with such fantasy or repetitive
 activity, and experiences distress or functional impairment, the diagnosis of sexual masochism
 disorder should be made.
 Fetishism.
 Use of a fetish object for sexual arousal (fetishism) without any associated distress or
 psychosocial role impairment or other adverse consequence would not meet criteria for fetishistic
 disorder, as the threshold required by Criterion B would not be met. For example, an individual
 whose sexual partner either shares or can successfully incorporate his interest in caressing,
 smelling, or licking feet or toes as an important element of foreplay would not be diagnosed with
 fetishistic disorder; nor would an individual who prefers, and is not distressed or impaired by,
 solitary sexual behavior associated with wearing rubber garments or leather boots.
 Comorbidity
 Fetishistic disorder may co-occur with other paraphilic disorders as well as hypersexuality.
 Rarely, fetishistic disorder may be associated with neurological conditions.