Sexual Masochism Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the
 act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as
 manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
 B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Specify if:
 With asphyxiophilia: If the individual engages in the practice of achieving
 sexual arousal related to restriction of breathing.
 F65.51
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
 living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in
 masochistic sexual behaviors are restricted.
 In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an
 uncontrolled environment.
 Diagnostic Features
 The diagnostic criteria for sexual masochism disorder are intended to apply to individuals who
 freely admit to having such paraphilic interests. Such individuals openly acknowledge intense
 sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as
 manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors. If these individuals also report psychosocial
 difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for being humiliated, beaten, bound,
 or otherwise made to suffer, they may be diagnosed with sexual masochism disorder. In contrast,
 if they declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these
 paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them in pursuing other personal goals, they could
 be ascertained as having masochistic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with sexual
 masochism disorder.
 The term bondage-domination-sadism-masochism (BDSM) is broadly used to refer to a wide
 range of behaviors that individuals with sexual masochism and/or sexual sadism (as well as other
 individuals with similar sexual interests) engage in, such as restraints or restriction, discipline,
 spanking, slapping, sensory deprivation (e.g., using blindfolds), and dominance-submission role
play involving themes such as master/enslaved person, owner/pet, or kidnapper/victim.
 Associated Features
 The extensive use of pornography involving the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or
 otherwise made to suffer is sometimes an associated feature of sexual masochism disorder.
Those who engage in sadomasochistic sexual behavior may experience a hyposensitivity to pain,
 although it is unknown whether this finding applies to those with sexual masochism disorder.
 Additionally, although it is often assumed that individuals with
 789
 masochistic sexual interest have a history of childhood sexual abuse experiences, there is
 insufficient evidence to support this association.
 Prevalence
 The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for sexual
 masochism disorder is unknown. In Australia, it has been estimated that 2.2% of men and 1.3%
 of women had been involved in BDSM behavior in the past 12 months.
 Development and Course
 Individuals with paraphilias living in the community have reported a mean age at onset for
 masochism of 19.3 years, although earlier ages, including puberty and childhood, have also been
 reported for the onset of masochistic fantasies. Very little is known about persistence over time.
 With or without treatment of sexual masochism disorder, the subjective distress (e.g., guilt,
 shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change over
 time, as may a number of factors that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such as
 psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course may
 vary over time. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with
 decreasing sexual masochistic preferences and behavior.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 It is important to distinguish self-harming behaviors that occur during collectively accepted
 religious and spiritual practices from sadomasochistic behavior conducted for sexual arousal. For
 example, collective rituals in various religions and societies include suspension from hooks, self
flagellation, self-mortification, and other painful ordeals. The role of sexual arousal or pleasure
 in these practices remains unknown.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Association of sexual masochism disorder with suicidal thoughts or behavior is unknown.
 However, a study of 321 adults who endorsed BDSM involvement found an association of
 stigma-related shame and guilt with suicidal ideation.
 Functional Consequences of Sexual Masochism Disorder
 The functional consequences of sexual masochism disorder are unknown. Individuals reporting
 sexual interest in asphyxiophilia seem to experience more sexual distress and psychological
 maladjustment than the general population. Individuals engaging in masochistic behavior are at
 risk for accidental death while practicing asphyxiophilia or other autoerotic procedures.
 However, the proportion of these decedents whose sexual interests and behavior fulfill diagnostic
criteria for sexual masochism is unknown.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Sexual masochism.
 Individuals with sexual masochism experience recurrent, intense sexual
 arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer. Unless the
 sexual urges, fantasies, or behaviors involving being humiliated or made to suffer are
 accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
 important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of sexual masochism disorder is not warranted.
 Comorbidity
 Known comorbidities with sexual masochism disorder are largely based on individuals in
 treatment. Disorders that occur comorbidly with sexual masochism disorder typically
 790
 include other paraphilic disorders, such as transvestic fetishism. There is some indication of an
 association of sexual masochism disorder with borderline personality disorder (based on data
 from a small clinical sample of women with and without borderline personality disorder).