Comorbidity
 Cannabis use disorder is highly comorbid with other substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol,
 cocaine, opioids). For example, compared with adults without cannabis use disorder, having a
 cannabis use disorder multiplies the risk for any other substance disorder by a factor of about
 nine. Cannabis has been commonly considered as a “gateway” drug because individuals who use
 cannabis have a substantially greater lifetime probability than nonusers of subsequently using
 other, more risky substances (e.g., opioids or cocaine). Among adults seeking treatment for a
 cannabis use disorder, many (63%) report problematic use of secondary or tertiary substances,
 including alcohol, cocaine, methamphetamine/amphetamine, and heroin or other opiates, and
 cannabis use disorder is often a secondary or tertiary problem among those with a primary
 diagnosis of other substance use disorders. Among adolescents in treatment, cannabis is
 frequently the primary substance of abuse (76%).
 582
 Among adults with DSM-5 cannabis use disorder, 64% had a past-year tobacco use disorder,
 and the odds of a comorbid tobacco disorder increased sharply as the severity of cannabis use
 disorder increased.
 Co-occurring mental disorders are also common among those with cannabis use disorder and
include major depressive disorder, bipolar I and II disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic
 stress disorder, and personality disorders. In a Minnesota twin study, about half of adolescents
 with cannabis use disorder had internalizing disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, posttraumatic
 stress disorder), and 64% had externalizing disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
 Considerable concern has been raised about cannabis use as a risk factor in schizophrenia and
 other psychotic disorders. Cannabis use in critical periods is consistently associated with a
 threefold increase in the risk for psychosis. Differences in frequency of daily cannabis use and
 use of high-potency varieties of cannabis may have contributed to the striking variation in the
 incidence of psychotic disorder across 11 European sites. The population attributable fraction
 from regular cannabis in explaining hospital admissions for psychosis was estimated to be 17.7%
 (95% CI: 1.2%–45.5%) in Chile. On the other hand, some data suggest that childhood abuse may
 be the determining factor that increases the risk for cannabis abuse and for psychosis. Overall,
 cannabis use may contribute to the onset of an acute psychotic episode, can exacerbate some
 symptoms, and can adversely affect treatment of a major psychotic illness.
 Regarding medical conditions, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome is a syndrome of nausea
 and cyclic vomiting associated with regular cannabis use that is increasingly seen in emergency
 departments as the prevalence of cannabis use increases. In addition, respiratory disorders (e.g.,
 asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pneumonia) are associated with regular cannabis
 use (by smoking, vaping, or e-cigarettes) regardless of tobacco co-use, as are some adverse
 cardiovascular outcomes.