Differential Diagnosis
 Nonsexual mental disorders.
 Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder, in
 which there is “markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
 the day, nearly every day,” may explain the lack of sexual interest/arousal. If the lack of interest
Substance/medication use.
 Another medical condition.
 Interpersonal factors.
 Other sexual dysfunctions.
 Inadequate or absent sexual stimuli.
 F52.6
 or arousal is completely attributable to another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of female sexual
 interest/arousal disorder would not be made.
 An onset of difficulties in desire or arousal that coincides with the
 beginning of substance/medication use and that dissipates with discontinuation of the
 substance/medication or dose reduction is suggestive of a substance/medication-induced sexual
 dysfunction, which should be diagnosed instead of female sexual interest/arousal disorder.
 If the sexual symptoms are considered to be almost exclusively
 associated with the effects of another medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
 493
 endothelial disease, thyroid dysfunction, central nervous system disease), then a diagnosis of
 female sexual interest/arousal disorder would not be made.
 If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship
 distress, intimate partner violence, or other significant stressors, explain the sexual
 interest/arousal symptoms, then a diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder would not
 be made.
 The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a
 diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder. It is common for women to experience more
 than one sexual dysfunction. For example, the presence of chronic genital pain may lead to a lack
 of desire for the (painful) sexual activity. Lack of interest and arousal during sexual activity may
 impair orgasmic ability. For some women, all aspects of the sexual response may be unsatisfying
 and distressing.
 When differential diagnoses are being considered, it is
 important to assess the adequacy of sexual stimuli within the woman’s sexual experience. In
 cases where inadequate or absent sexual stimuli are contributing to the clinical picture, there may
 be evidence for clinical care, but a sexual dysfunction diagnosis would not be made. Similarly,
 transient and adaptive alterations in sexual functioning that are secondary to a significant life or
 personal event must be considered in the differential diagnosis.
 