Differential Diagnosis
 Another medical condition.
 In many instances, females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration
 disorder will also be diagnosed with another medical condition (e.g., lichen sclerosus,
 endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, genitourinary syndrome of menopause). In some
 cases, treating the medical condition may alleviate the genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
 Much of the time, this is not the case. There are no reliable tools or diagnostic methods to allow
 clinicians to know whether the medical condition or genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is
Somatic symptom and related disorders.
 Inadequate sexual stimuli.
 F52.0
 primary. Often, the associated medical conditions are difficult to diagnose and treat. For
 example, the increased incidence of postmenopausal pain during intercourse may sometimes be
 attributable to vaginal dryness or irritation associated with declining estrogen levels. The
 relationship, however, between genital symptoms, estrogen, and pain is not well understood.
 498
 Some females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
 may also be diagnosable with somatic symptom disorder. Since both genito-pelvic
 pain/penetration disorder and the somatic symptom and related disorders are new diagnoses in
 DSM-5, it is not yet clear whether they can be reliably differentiated. Some females diagnosed
 with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder will also be diagnosed with a specific phobia.
 It is important that the clinician, in considering differential diagnoses,
 assess the adequacy of sexual stimuli within the female’s sexual experience. Sexual situations in
 which there is inadequate foreplay or arousal may lead to difficulties in penetration, pain, or
 avoidance. Erectile dysfunction or premature (early) ejaculation in the male partner may result in
 difficulties with penetration. These conditions should be carefully assessed. In some situations, a
 diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder may not be appropriate
