Differential Diagnosis
 Oppositional defiant disorder.
 Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related
to symptoms that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority figures (e.g.,
 parents, teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder are typically
 of a less severe nature than those of individuals with conduct disorder and do not include
 aggression toward people or animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit.
 Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotion dysregulation (i.e.,
 angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct disorder. When
 criteria are met for both oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, both diagnoses can
 be given.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Although children with ADHD often exhibit hyperactive
 and impulsive behavior that may be disruptive, this behavior does not by itself violate societal
 norms or the rights of others and therefore does not usually meet criteria for conduct disorder.
 When criteria are met for both ADHD and conduct disorder, both diagnoses should be given.
 Depressive and bipolar disorders.
 Irritability, aggression, and conduct problems can occur in
 children or adolescents with major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, or disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder. The behavioral problems associated with these mood disorders can
 usually be distinguished from the pattern of conduct problems seen in conduct disorder based on
 their course. Specifically, individuals with conduct disorder will display substantial levels of
 aggressive or nonaggressive conduct problems during periods in which there is no mood
 disturbance, either historically (i.e., a history of conduct problems predating the onset of the
 mood disturbance) or concurrently (i.e., display of some conduct problems that are premeditated
 and do not occur during periods of intense emotional arousal). In those cases in which criteria for
 conduct disorder and a mood disorder are met, both diagnoses can be given.
 Intermittent explosive disorder.
 Both conduct disorder and intermittent explosive disorder involve
 high rates of aggression. However, the aggression in individuals with intermittent explosive
 disorder is limited to impulsive aggression and is not premeditated, and it is not committed in
 order to achieve some tangible objective (e.g., money, power, intimidation). Also, the definition
 of intermittent explosive disorder does not include the non-aggressive symptoms of conduct
 disorder. If criteria for both disorders are met, the diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder
 should be given only when the recurrent impulsive aggressive outbursts warrant independent
 clinical attention.
 537
 Adjustment disorders.
 The diagnosis of an adjustment disorder (with disturbance of conduct or
 with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct) should be considered if clinically significant
 conduct problems that do not meet the criteria for another specific disorder develop in clear
 association with the onset of a psychosocial stressor and do not resolve within 6 months of the
 termination of the stressor (or its consequences). Conduct disorder is diagnosed only when the
 conduct problems represent a repetitive and persistent pattern that is associated with impairment
 in social, academic, or occupational functioning.

 