Differential Diagnosis
 A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when Criteria A1 and/or A2
 are only met during an episode of another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder,
 bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder), or when impulsive aggressive outbursts are attributable to
 another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance or medication. This
 diagnosis also should not be made, particularly in children and adolescents ages 6–18 years,
 when the impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 In contrast to intermittent explosive disorder, disruptive
 mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by a persistently negative mood state (i.e.,
 irritability, anger) most of the day, nearly every day, between impulsive aggressive outbursts. A
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder can only be given when the onset of
 recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive outbursts is before age 10 years. Finally, a diagnosis
 of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not be made for the first time after age 18
 years. Otherwise, these diagnoses are mutually exclusive.
 Antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder.
 Individuals 
with 
personality disorder or borderline personality disorder often display recurrent,
 530
 antisocial
 problematic impulsive aggressive outbursts. However, the level of impulsive aggression in
 individuals with antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder is lower than
 that in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder.
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and personality change due to another medical
 condition, aggressive type.
 Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or
 autism spectrum disorder.
 A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when aggressive outbursts are
 judged to result from the physiological effects of another diagnosable medical condition (e.g.,
 brain injury associated with a change in personality characterized by aggressive outbursts;
 complex partial epilepsy). Nonspecific abnormalities on neurological examination (e.g., “soft
 signs”) and nonspecific electroencephalographic changes are compatible with a diagnosis of
 intermittent explosive disorder unless there is a diagnosable medical condition that better
 explains the impulsive aggressive outbursts.
 A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder
 should not be made when impulsive aggressive outbursts are nearly always associated with
 intoxication with or withdrawal from substances (e.g., alcohol, phencyclidine, cocaine and other
 stimulants, barbiturates, inhalants). However, when a sufficient number of impulsive aggressive
 outbursts also occur in the absence of substance intoxication or withdrawal, and these warrant
 independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
 Individuals with any of these childhood-onset disorders may exhibit impulsive aggressive
 outbursts. Individuals with ADHD are typically impulsive and, as a result, may also exhibit
 impulsive aggressive outbursts. While individuals with conduct disorder can exhibit impulsive
 aggressive outbursts, the form of aggression characterized by the diagnostic criteria is proactive
 and predatory. Aggression in oppositional defiant disorder is typically characterized by temper
 tantrums and verbal arguments with authority figures, whereas impulsive aggressive outbursts in
 intermittent explosive disorder are in response to a broader array of provocation and include
 physical assault. The level of impulsive aggression in individuals with a history of one or more
 of these disorders has been reported as lower than that in comparable individuals whose
 symptoms also meet intermittent explosive disorder Criteria A through E. Accordingly, if
 Criteria A through E are also met, and the impulsive aggressive outbursts warrant independent
 clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
 