Differential Diagnosis
 Conduct disorder.
 Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related to conduct
 problems that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority figures (e.g.,
 teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder are typically of a less
 severe nature than those of conduct disorder and do not include aggression toward people or
 animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit. However, evidence suggests that
 oppositional defiant disorder is associated with equivalent or even greater levels of impairment
 than conduct disorder. Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotion
 dysregulation (i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct
 disorder.
 Adjustment disorder.
 Environmental and family stressors may be associated with externalizing
 manifestations of emotion dysregulation. In children, these may manifest as
526
 tantrums and oppositional behavior; and in adolescents, as aggressive behaviors (e.g., rebellion
 and defiance). Temporal association with a stressor and symptom duration of less than 6 months
 after the resolution of the stressor may help distinguish adjustment disorder from oppositional
 defiant disorder.
 Posttraumatic stress disorder.
 In children younger than 6 years, posttraumatic stress disorder may
 manifest initially as dysregulated behaviors, opposition, and tantrums; the association with a
 traumatic event and with other specific symptoms (traumatic play) are key to establishing the
 diagnosis. In adolescents, traumatic reenactment and risk-taking may be misinterpreted as
 defiance and opposition or as conduct problems.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 ADHD is often comorbid with oppositional defiant disorder.
 To make the additional diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder, it is important to determine
 that the individual’s failure to conform to requests of others is not solely in situations that
 demand sustained effort and attention or demand that the individual sit still.
 Depressive and bipolar disorders.
 Depressive and bipolar disorders often involve negative affect
 and irritability. As a result, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder should not be made if the
 symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a mood disorder.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 Oppositional defiant disorder shares with disruptive mood
 dysregulation disorder the symptoms of chronic irritable mood and temper outbursts. However, if
 the irritable mood and other symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
 a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is not given, even if all criteria for oppositional
 defiant disorder are met.
 Intermittent explosive disorder.
 Intermittent explosive disorder also involves high rates of anger.
 However, individuals with this disorder show serious aggression toward others that is not part of
 the definition of oppositional defiant disorder.
 Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
 In 
individuals 
with 
intellectual
 developmental disorder, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is given only if the
 oppositional behavior is markedly greater than is commonly observed among individuals of
 comparable mental age and with comparable severity of intellectual disability.
 Language disorder.
 Social anxiety disorder.
 Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from a failure to
 follow directions that is the result of impaired language comprehension (e.g., hearing loss).
 Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from defiance
 because of fear of negative evaluation associated with social anxiety disorder.


 