Speech Sound Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent difficulty with speech sound production that interferes with speech
intelligibility or prevents verbal communication of messages.
B. The disturbance causes limitations in effective communication that interfere with
social participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance,
individually or in any combination.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The difficulties are not attributable to congenital or acquired conditions, such as
cerebral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, or
other medical or neurological conditions.
Diagnostic Features
Speech sound production describes the clear articulation of the phonemes (i.e., individual
sounds) that in combination make up spoken words. Speech sound production requires both the
phonological knowledge of speech sounds and the ability to coordinate the movements of the
articulators (i.e., the jaw, tongue, and lips,) with breathing and vocalizing for speech. Children
with speech production difficulties may experience difficulty with phonological knowledge of
speech sounds or the ability to coordinate movements for speech in varying degrees. A speech
sound disorder is diagnosed when speech sound production is not what would be expected based
on the child’s age and developmental stage and when the deficits are not the result of a physical,
structural, neurological, or hearing impairment. Among typically developing children at age 3
years, overall speech should be intelligible, whereas at age 2 years, only 50% may be
understandable. Boys are more likely (range of 1.5–1.8 to 1.0) to have a speech sound disorder
than girls.
Associated Features
Language disorder may be found to co-occur with speech sound disorder, although co-
occurrences are rare by age 6 years. A positive family history of speech or language disorders is
often present.
If the ability to rapidly coordinate the articulators is a particular aspect of difficulty, there
may be a history of delay or incoordination in acquiring skills that also utilize the articulators and
related facial musculature; among others, these skills include chewing, maintaining mouth
closure, and blowing the nose. Other areas of motor coordination may be impaired as in
developmental coordination disorder. The terms childhood apraxia of speech and verbal
dyspraxia are used for speech production problems with motor components.
Development and Course
Learning to produce speech sounds clearly and accurately and learning to produce connected
speech fluently are developmental skills. Articulation of speech sounds follows a developmental
pattern, which is reflected in the age norms of standardized tests. It is not unusual for typically
developing children to use developmental processes for shortening words and syllables as they
are learning to talk, but their progression in mastering speech sound production should result in
mostly intelligible speech by age 3 years. Children with speech sound disorder continue to use
Normal variations in speech.
Hearing or other sensory impairment.
Structural deficits.
Dysarthria.
Selective mutism.
immature phonological simplification processes past the age when most children can produce
words clearly.
Most speech sounds should be produced clearly and most words should be pronounced
accurately according to age and community norms by age 5 years. The most
51
frequently misarticulated sounds in English also tend to be learned later, leading them to be
called the “late eight” (l, r, s, z, th, ch, dzh, and zh). Misarticulation of any of these sounds by
itself could be considered within normal limits up to age 8 years; however, when multiple sounds
are involved, it is important to target some of those sounds as part of a plan to improve
intelligibility, rather than waiting until the age at which almost all children can produce them
accurately. Lisping (i.e., misarticulating sibilants) is particularly common and may involve
frontal or lateral patterns of airstream direction. It may be associated with a tongue-thrust
swallowing pattern.
Most children with speech sound disorder respond well to treatment, and speech difficulties
improve over time, and thus the disorder may not be lifelong. However, when a language
disorder is also present, the speech disorder has a poorer prognosis and may be associated with
specific learning disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of speech should be
considered before making the diagnosis. Bilingual children may demonstrate an overall lower
intelligibility rating, make more overall consonant and vowel errors, and produce more
uncommon error patterns than monolingual English-speaking children when assessed only in
English.
Those who are deaf or hard of hearing may have speech
sound production errors. When speech deficits are in excess of those usually associated with
these problems, a diagnosis of speech sound disorder may be made.
Speech impairment may be due to structural deficits (e.g., cleft palate).
Speech impairment may be attributable to a motor disorder, such as cerebral palsy.
Neurological signs, as well as distinctive features of voice, differentiate dysarthria from speech
sound disorder, although in young children (under 3 years) differentiation may be difficult,
particularly when there is no or minimal general body motor involvement (as in, e.g., Worster-
Drought syndrome).
Limited use of speech may be a sign of selective mutism, an anxiety disorder
that is characterized by a lack of speech in one or more contexts or settings. Selective mutism
may develop in children with a speech disorder because of embarrassment about their
impairments, but many children with selective mutism exhibit normal speech in “safe” settings,
such as at home or with close friends.
Comorbidity
Speech may be differentially impaired in certain genetic conditions (e.g., Down syndrome, 22q
deletion, FoxP2 gene mutation). If present, these should also be coded.
F80.81