Language Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language across modalities
(i.e., spoken, written, sign language, or other) due to deficits in comprehension
or production that include the following:
1. Reduced vocabulary (word knowledge and use).
2. Limited sentence structure (ability to put words and word endings together to
form sentences based on the rules of grammar and morphology).
3. Impairments in discourse (ability to use vocabulary and connect sentences to
explain or describe a topic or series of events or have a conversation).
B. Language abilities are substantially and quantifiably below those expected for
age, resulting in functional limitations in effective communication, social
participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance, individually
or in any combination.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The difficulties are not attributable to hearing or other sensory impairment, motor
dysfunction, or another medical or neurological condition and are not better
explained by intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) or global
developmental delay.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of language disorder are difficulties in the acquisition and use of language
due to deficits in the comprehension or production of vocabulary, grammar, sentence structure,
and discourse. The language deficits are evident in spoken communication, written
communication, or sign language. Language learning and use is dependent on both receptive and
expressive skills. Expressive ability refers to the production of vocal, gestural, or verbal signals,
while receptive ability refers to the process of receiving and comprehending language messages.
Language skills need to be assessed in both expressive and receptive modalities as these may
differ in severity.
Language disorder usually affects vocabulary and grammar, and these effects then limit the
capacity for discourse. The child’s first words and phrases are likely to be delayed
48
in onset; vocabulary size is smaller and less varied than expected; and sentences are shorter
and less complex with grammatical errors, especially in past tense. Deficits in comprehension of
language are frequently underestimated, as children may be good at using context to infer
meaning. There may be word-finding problems, impoverished verbal definitions, or poor
understanding of synonyms, multiple meanings, or word play appropriate for age and culture.
Problems with remembering new words and sentences are manifested by difficulties following
instructions of increasing length, difficulties rehearsing strings of verbal information (e.g.,
remembering a phone number or a shopping list), and difficulties remembering novel sound
sequences, a skill that may be important for learning new words. Difficulties with discourse are
shown by a reduced ability to provide adequate information about the key events and to narrate a
coherent story.
The language difficulty is manifest by abilities substantially and quantifiably below that
expected for age and significantly interfering with academic achievement, occupational
performance, effective communication, or socialization (Criterion B). A diagnosis of language
disorder is made based on the synthesis of the individual’s history, direct clinical observation in
different contexts (i.e., home, school, or work), and scores from standardized tests of language
ability that can be used to guide estimates of severity.
Associated Features
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normal variations in language.
Individuals, even children, can be adept at accommodating to their limited language. They may
appear to be shy or reticent to talk. Affected individuals may prefer to communicate only with
family members or other familiar individuals. Although these social indicators are not diagnostic
of a language disorder, if they are notable and persistent, they warrant referral for a full language
assessment.
Development and Course
Language acquisition is marked by changes from onset in toddlerhood to the adult level of
competency that appears during adolescence. Changes appear across the dimensions of language
(sounds, words, grammar, narratives/expository texts, and conversational skills) in age-graded
increments and synchronies. Language disorder emerges during the early developmental period;
however, there is considerable variation in early vocabulary acquisition and early word
combinations. Individual differences in early childhood are not, as single indicators, highly
predictive of later outcomes, although a late onset of language at age 24 months in a population-
based sample was the best predictor of outcomes at age 7 years. By age 4 years, individual
differences in language ability are more stable, with better measurement accuracy, and are highly
predictive of later outcomes. Language disorder diagnosed in children age 4 years and older is
likely to be stable over time and typically persists into adulthood, although the particular profile
of language strengths and deficits is likely to change over the course of development.
Language disorders can have social consequences across the lifespan. Children with language
disorders are at risk for peer victimization. For females with childhood language disorders, there
could be almost three times the risk compared with unaffected children for sexual assault in
adulthood.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Children with receptive language impairments have a poorer prognosis than those with
predominantly expressive impairments. Receptive language impairments are more resistant to
treatment, and difficulties with reading comprehension are frequently seen.
Bilingualism does not cause or worsen a language disorder, but children who are
bilingual may demonstrate delays or differences in language development. A
49
language disorder in bilingual children will affect both languages; therefore, assessment across
both languages is important to consider.
Language disorders are highly heritable, and family members are more
likely to have a history of language impairment. Population-based twin studies consistently
report substantial heritability for language disorder, and molecular studies suggest multiple genes
interacting on causal pathways.
Differential Diagnosis
Language disorder needs to be distinguished from normal
developmental variations, and this distinction may be difficult to make before age 4 years.
Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of language (e.g., dialects) must be considered
Hearing or other sensory impairment.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Autism spectrum disorder.
Neurological disorders.
Language regression.
F80.0
when an individual is being assessed for language impairment.
Hearing impairment needs to be excluded as the primary
cause of language difficulties. Language deficits may be associated with a hearing impairment,
other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When language deficits are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of language disorder may be made.
Language 
impairment 
is 
often 
the
presenting feature of intellectual developmental disorder. However, the definitive diagnosis of
intellectual developmental disorder may not be made until the child is able to complete
standardized assessments. Language disorder can occur with varying degrees of intellectual
ability, and a discrepancy between verbal and nonverbal ability is not necessary for a diagnosis
of language disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder frequently manifests with delayed language
development. However, autism spectrum disorder is often accompanied by behaviors not present
in language disorder, such as lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., pulling
individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g., carrying
toys around but never playing with them), unusual communication patterns (e.g., knowing the
alphabet but not responding to own name), and rigid adherence to routines and repetitive
behaviors (e.g., flapping, spinning, echolalia).
Language disorder can be acquired in association with neurological
disorders, including epilepsy (e.g., acquired aphasia or Landau-Kleffner syndrome).
Loss of speech and language in a child at any age warrants thorough
assessment to determine if there is a specific neurological condition, such as Landau-Kleffner
syndrome. Language loss may be a symptom of seizures, and a diagnostic assessment is
necessary to exclude the presence of epilepsy (e.g., routine and sleep electroencephalogram).
Declines in critical social and communication behaviors during the first 2 years of life are
evident in most children presenting with autism spectrum disorder and should signal the need for
autism spectrum disorder assessment.
Comorbidity
Language disorder may be associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders in terms of
specific learning disorder (literacy and numeracy), intellectual developmental disorder, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and developmental coordination
disorder. It is also associated with social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In clinical
samples, language disorder may co-occur with speech sound disorder, although data from a large
population-based sample of 6-year-old children in the United States suggest comorbidity might
be rare (1.3%). A positive family history of speech or language disorders is often present.
50