Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that are
inappropriate for the individual’s age and language skills, persist over time, and
are characterized by frequent and marked occurrences of one (or more) of the
following:
1. Sound and syllable repetitions.
2. Sound prolongations of consonants as well as vowels.
52
3. Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word).
4. Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech).
5. Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words).
6. Words produced with an excess of physical tension.
7. Monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”).
B. The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in effective
communication, social participation, or academic or occupational performance,
individually or in any combination.
C. The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. (Note: Later-onset
cases are diagnosed as F98.5 adult-onset fluency disorder.)
D. The disturbance is not attributable to a speech-motor or sensory deficit,
dysfluency associated with neurological insult (e.g., stroke, tumor, trauma), or
another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental
disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) is a disturbance in the
normal fluency and time patterning of speech that is inappropriate for the individual’s age. This
disturbance is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds or syllables and
by other types of speech dysfluencies, including broken words (e.g., pauses within a word),
audible or silent blocking (i.e., filled or unfilled pauses in speech), circumlocutions (i.e., word
substitutions to avoid problematic words), words produced with an excess of physical tension,
and monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”). The disturbance in fluency
may interfere with academic or occupational achievement and with social communication. The
extent of the disturbance varies from situation to situation and often is more severe when there is
special pressure to communicate (e.g., giving a report at school, interviewing for a job).
Dysfluency is often absent during oral reading, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets.
Genetic and physiological.
Associated Features
Fearful anticipation of the problem may develop. The speaker may attempt to avoid dysfluencies
by linguistic mechanisms (e.g., altering the rate of speech, avoiding certain words or sounds) or
by avoiding certain speech situations, such as telephoning or public speaking. In addition to
being features of the condition, stress and anxiety have been shown to exacerbate dysfluency.
Childhood-onset fluency disorder may also be accompanied by motor movements (e.g., eye
blinks, tics, tremors of the lips or face, jerking of the head, breathing movements, fist clenching).
Children with fluency disorder show a range of language abilities, and the relationship between
fluency disorder and language abilities is unclear.
Studies have shown both structural and functional neurological differences in children who
stutter. Males are more likely to stutter than females, with estimates varying depending on the
age and possible cause of stuttering. Causes of stuttering are multifactorial, including certain
genetic and neurophysiological factors.
Development and Course
Childhood-onset fluency disorder, or developmental stuttering, occurs by age 6 for 80%–90% of
affected individuals, with age at onset ranging from 2 to 7 years. The onset can be insidious or
more sudden. Typically, dysfluencies start gradually, with repetition of initial consonants, first
words of a phrase, or long words. The child may not be aware of dysfluencies. As the disorder
progresses, the dysfluencies become more frequent and interfering, occurring on the most
meaningful words or phrases in the utterance. As the child becomes aware of the speech
difficulty, he or she may develop mechanisms for avoiding the
53
dysfluencies and emotional responses, including avoidance of public speaking and use of short
and simple utterances. Longitudinal research shows that 65%–85% of children recover from the
dysfluency, with severity of fluency disorder at age 8 years predicting recovery or persistence
into adolescence and beyond.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The risk of stuttering among first-degree biological relatives of
individuals with childhood-onset fluency disorder is more than three times the risk in the general
population. To date, mutations of four genes that underlie some cases of stuttering have been
identified.
Functional Consequences of Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder
(Stuttering)
In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety can exacerbate dysfluency.
Impairment of social functioning may result from this anxiety. Negative communication attitudes
may be a functional consequence of stuttering starting in the preschool years and increasing with
age.
Differential Diagnosis
Sensory deficits.
Normal speech dysfluencies.
Specific learning disorder, with impairment in reading.
Bilingualism.
Medication side effects.
Adult-onset dysfluencies.
Tourette’s disorder.
F80.82
Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment or other
sensory deficit or a speech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be
made.
The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysfluencies that
occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase repetitions (e.g., “I
want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled pauses, and parenthetical
remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity as the child grows older, a
diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be appropriate.
Children who have dysfluencies when they
read aloud may be diagnosed mistakenly as having a reading disorder. Oral reading fluency
typically is measured by timed assessments. Slower reading rates may not accurately reflect the
actual reading ability of children who stutter.
It is necessary to distinguish between dysfluencies resulting from attempts to learn
a new language and dysfluencies that indicate a fluency disorder, which typically appear in both
languages.
Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be detected
by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication.
If onset of dysfluencies is during or after adolescence, it is an “adult-
onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder. Adult-onset dysfluencies are
associated with specific neurological insults and a variety of medical conditions and mental
disorders and may be specified with them, but they are not a DSM-5 diagnosis.
Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of Tourette’s disorder should be
distinguishable from the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder by their nature
and timing.
Comorbidity
Childhood-onset fluency disorder can co-occur with other disorders, such as attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
54
disorder (intellectual disability), language disorder or specific learning disorder, seizure
disorders, social anxiety disorder, speech sound disorder, and other developmental disorders.