Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal communication as
manifested by all of the following:
1. Deficits in using communication for social purposes, such as greeting and
sharing information, in a manner that is appropriate for the social context.
2. Impairment of the ability to change communication to match context or the
needs of the listener, such as speaking differently in a classroom than on a
playground, talking differently to a child than to an adult, and avoiding use of
overly formal language.
3. Difficulties following rules for conversation and storytelling, such as taking
turns in conversation, rephrasing when misunderstood, and knowing how to
use verbal and nonverbal signals to regulate interaction.
4. Difficulties understanding what is not explicitly stated (e.g., making
inferences) and nonliteral or ambiguous meanings of language (e.g., idioms,
humor, metaphors, multiple meanings that depend on the context for
interpretation).
B. The deficits result in functional limitations in effective communication, social
participation, social relationships, academic achievement, or occupational
performance, individually or in combination.
C. The onset of the symptoms is in the early developmental period (but deficits may
not become fully manifest until social communication demands exceed limited
capacities).
D. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical or neurological condition
or to low abilities in the domains of word structure and grammar, and are not
better explained by autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability), global developmental delay, or another mental
disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder is characterized by a primary difficulty with
pragmatics (i.e., the social use of language and communication), as manifested by deficits in
understanding and following social rules of both verbal and nonverbal communication in
naturalistic contexts, changing language according to the needs of the listener or situation, and
following rules for conversations and storytelling. The deficits in social communication result in
functional limitations in effective communication, social participation, development of social
relationships, academic achievement, or occupational performance. The deficits are not better
explained by low abilities in the domains of structural language or cognitive ability or by autism
spectrum disorder.
Associated Features
The most common associated feature of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is language
impairment, which is characterized by a history of delay in reaching language milestones, and
historical, if not current, structural language problems (see “Language Disorder” earlier in this
chapter). Individuals with social communication deficits may
Genetic and physiological.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
55
avoid social interactions. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), emotional and
behavioral problems, and specific learning disorders are also more common among affected
individuals.
Development and Course
Because social (pragmatic) communication depends on adequate developmental progress in
speech and language, diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is rare among
children younger than 4 years. By age 4 or 5 years, most children should possess adequate
speech and language abilities to permit identification of specific deficits in social
communication. Milder forms of the disorder may not become apparent until early adolescence,
when language and social interactions become more complex.
The outcome of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is variable, with some children
improving substantially over time and others continuing to have difficulties persisting into
adulthood. Even among those who have significant improvements, the early deficits in
pragmatics may cause lasting impairments in social relationships and behavior and also low
performance of other related skills, such as written expression, reading comprehension, and oral
reading.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A family history of autism spectrum disorder, communication
disorders, or specific learning disorder appears to increase the risk for social (pragmatic)
communication disorder; this includes siblings of children with these disorders who may present
with early symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Autism spectrum disorder is the primary diagnostic consideration for
individuals presenting with social communication deficits. The two disorders can be
differentiated by the presence in autism spectrum disorder of restricted/repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities and their absence in social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may only display the restricted/repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, and activities during the early developmental period, so a comprehensive
history should be obtained. Current absence of symptoms would not preclude a diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder, if the restricted interests and repetitive behaviors were present in the
past. A diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder should be considered only if the
current symptoms or developmental history fails to reveal evidence of symptoms that meet the
diagnostic criteria for restricted/repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities of autism
spectrum disorder (i.e., Criterion B) causing current impairment. The social communication
symptoms may be milder in social (pragmatic) communication disorder than in autism spectrum
disorder, although qualitatively similar.
Primary deficits of ADHD may cause impairments in social
communication and functional limitations of effective communication, social participation, or
academic achievement.
Social anxiety disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and global developmental delay.
F84.0
The symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder overlap with
those of social anxiety disorder. The differentiating feature is the timing of the onset of
symptoms. In social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the individual has never had effective
social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social communication skills developed
appropriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or distress about social interactions.
56
Social
communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global developmental delay or
intellectual developmental disorder, but a separate diagnosis is not given unless the social
communication deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations.