Opioid Withdrawal
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Presence of either of the following:
 1. Cessation of (or reduction in) opioid use that has been heavy and prolonged
 (i.e., several weeks or longer).
 2. Administration of an opioid antagonist after a period of opioid use.
 B. Three (or more) of the following developing within minutes to several days after
 Criterion A:
 1. Dysphoric mood.
 2. Nausea or vomiting.
 3. Muscle aches.
 4. Lacrimation or rhinorrhea.
 5. Pupillary dilation, piloerection, or sweating.
 6. Diarrhea.
 7. Yawning.
 8. Fever.
 9. Insomnia.
 C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
 withdrawal from another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
opioid use disorder. If a mild opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
 F11.13, and if a moderate or severe opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
 code is F11.23. For opioid withdrawal occurring in the absence of an opioid use
 disorder (e.g., in a patient taking opioids solely under appropriate medical
 supervision), the ICD-10-CM code is F11.93.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of opioid withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
 syndrome that develops after the cessation of (or reduction in) prolonged opioid use
 618
 (Criterion A1). The opioids used may be illicit or licitly obtained drugs prescribed to treat pain.
 A withdrawal syndrome can also be precipitated by administration of an opioid antagonist (e.g.,
 naloxone, naltrexone, nalmefene) after a period of opioid use (Criterion A2); it can also occur
 after administration of an opioid partial agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) to an individual currently
 using a full opioid agonist.
 Opioid withdrawal has a characteristic pattern of signs and symptoms. The first of these are
 subjective and consist of complaints of anxiety, restlessness, and an “achy feeling” that is often
 located in the back and legs, along with irritability and increased sensitivity to pain. Three or
 more of the following must be present to make a diagnosis of opioid withdrawal: dysphoric
 mood; nausea or vomiting; muscle aches; lacrimation or rhinorrhea; pupillary dilation,
 piloerection, or increased sweating; diarrhea; yawning; fever; and insomnia (Criterion B).
 Piloerection and fever are associated with more severe withdrawal and are not often seen in
 routine clinical practice because individuals with opioid use disorder usually obtain substances
 before withdrawal becomes that far advanced. These symptoms of opioid withdrawal must cause
 clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
 functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical condition
 and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Having symptoms that
 meet diagnostic criteria for opioid withdrawal alone is not sufficient for a diagnosis of opioid use
 disorder, but concurrent symptoms of craving and drug-seeking behavior are suggestive of
 comorbid opioid use disorder.
 Associated Features
 Opioid withdrawal may occur in any individual after cessation of repeated use of an opioid,
 whether in the setting of medical management of pain, during opioid agonist therapy for opioid
 use disorder, in the context of illicit use, or following attempts to self-treat symptoms of mental
 disorders with opioids. Opioid withdrawal is a distinct condition from opioid addiction or opioid
 use disorder and does not necessarily require the drug-seeking behaviors associated with opioid
 use disorder to be diagnosed. Thus, opioid withdrawal may occur in individuals without opioid
 use disorder and should not be confused with it. Males with opioid withdrawal may experience
 piloerection, sweating, and spontaneous ejaculations while awake.
 Prevalence
Among individuals from various U.S. clinical settings, opioid withdrawal occurred in 60% of
 individuals who had used heroin at least once in the prior 12 months. Individuals regularly using
 opioids (e.g., prescription opioids for pain, illicit opioids) for a period of time are at risk for
 developing physical dependence, including withdrawal, on cessation or marked reduction in use.
 Development and Course
 The speed and severity of withdrawal associated with opioids depend on the half-life of the
 opioid used. Most individuals who are physiologically dependent on short-acting drugs such as
 heroin begin to have withdrawal symptoms within 6–12 hours after the last dose. Symptoms may
 take 2–4 days to emerge in the case of longer-acting drugs such as methadone or buprenorphine.
 Acute withdrawal symptoms for a short-acting opioid such as heroin usually peak within 1–3
 days and gradually subside over a period of 5–7 days. More chronic symptoms (e.g., anxiety,
 dysphoria, anhedonia, craving, insomnia) can last for weeks to months. The severity of opioid
 withdrawal also varies depending on the duration of opioid use. Opioid withdrawal symptoms
 among individuals receiving long-term prescription opioid treatment for pain can be minimized
 by tapering the drug slowly.
 619
 Among those with an opioid use disorder, opioid withdrawal and attempts to relieve
 withdrawal are typical. The course of withdrawal can be part of an escalating pattern in which an
 opioid is used to reduce withdrawal symptoms, in turn leading to recurrent episodes of
 withdrawal at a later time.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other withdrawal disorders.
 The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid withdrawal
 resemble symptoms seen in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid withdrawal is also
 accompanied by rhinorrhea, lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which are not seen in sedative
type withdrawal.
 Other substance intoxication.
 Dilated pupils are also seen in hallucinogen intoxication and
 Opioid-induced mental disorders.
 stimulant intoxication. However, other signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal, such as nausea,
 vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, and lacrimation, are not present.
 Opioid withdrawal is distinguished from opioid-induced mental
 disorders (e.g., opioid-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because the
 symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
 associated with opioid withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe
 enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of opioid withdrawal with opioid use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
 under Opioid Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
 encountered.
