Opioid Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A problematic pattern of opioid use leading to clinically significant impairment or
 distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12
month period:
 1. Opioids are often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
 intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 opioid use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the opioid, use
 the opioid, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use opioids.
 5. Recurrent opioid use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
 work, school, or home.
 6. Continued opioid use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
 interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of opioids.
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of opioid use.
 609
 8. Recurrent opioid use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
 9. Continued opioid use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
 physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or
 exacerbated by the substance.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of opioids to achieve intoxication
 or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 an opioid.
 Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking opioids solely
 under appropriate medical supervision.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic opioid withdrawal syndrome (refer to Criteria A and B of
 the criteria set for opioid withdrawal).
 b. Opioids (or a closely related substance) are taken to relieve or avoid
 withdrawal symptoms.
 Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those individuals taking
 opioids solely under appropriate medical supervision.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for opioid use disorder were previously met,
 none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met for at least 3 months
 but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
 strong desire or urge to use opioids,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for opioid use disorder were previously
 met, none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met at any time during
 a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or
 a strong desire or urge to use opioids,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 On maintenance therapy: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 taking a prescribed agonist medication such as methadone or buprenorphine
 and none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met for that class of
medication (except tolerance to, or withdrawal from, the agonist). This category
 also applies to those individuals being maintained on a partial agonist, an
 agonist/antagonist, or a full antagonist such as oral naltrexone or depot
 naltrexone.
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to opioids is restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If an opioid intoxication, opioid
 withdrawal, or another opioid-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the
 codes below for opioid use disorder. Instead, the comorbid opioid use disorder is
 indicated in the 4th character of the opioid-induced disorder code (see the coding
 note for opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or a specific opioid-induced mental
 disorder). For example, if there is comorbid opioid-induced depressive disorder and
 opioid use disorder, only the opioid-induced depressive disorder code is given, with
 the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid opioid use disorder is mild,
 moderate, or severe: F11.14 for mild opioid use disorder with opioid-induced
 depressive disorder or F11.24 for a moderate or severe opioid use disorder with
 opioid-induced depressive disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 F11.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F11.11 Mild, In early remission
 F11.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 610
 F11.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F11.21 Moderate, In early remission
 F11.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F11.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F11.21 Severe, In early remission
 F11.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 Specifiers
 The “on maintenance therapy” specifier applies as a further specifier of remission if the
 individual is both in remission and receiving maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environment”
 applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in a controlled
 environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained remission in a
 controlled environment). Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substance
free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Changing severity across time in an individual is also reflected by reductions in the
 frequency (e.g., days of use per month) and/or dose (e.g., injections or number of pills) of an
 opioid, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of knowledgeable others, clinician’s
observations, and biological testing.
 Diagnostic Features
 The opioids include natural opioids (e.g., morphine, codeine), semisynthetics (e.g., heroin,
 oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, oxymorphone), and synthetics with morphine-like
 action (e.g., methadone, meperidine, tramadol, fentanyl, carfentanil). Medications such as
 pentazocine and buprenorphine that have both opiate agonist and antagonist effects are also
 included in this class because, especially at lower doses, their agonist properties produce similar
 physiological and behavioral effects as classic opioid agonists. Opioids are prescribed as
 analgesics, anesthetics, antidiarrheal agents, or cough suppressants. Heroin is one of the most
 commonly misused drugs of this class and is usually taken by injection, although it can be
 smoked or “snorted,” especially when very pure heroin is available. Fentanyl is typically
 injected, both medically and nonmedically, and is used medically in transdermal and
 transmucosal formulations, whereas cough suppressants and antidiarrheal agents are taken orally.
 The other opioids are generally taken both by injection and orally.
 Opioid use disorder can arise from prescription opioids or illicit opioids (e.g., heroin and,
 especially in recent years, fentanyl-related synthetic opioids). Opioid use disorder consists of
 signs and symptoms reflecting compulsive, prolonged self-administration of opioid substances
 either for a purpose other than a legitimate medical one or for use in a “non-medical” manner
 (i.e., greatly exceeding the amount prescribed for a medical condition). For example, an
 individual with adequate doses of prescribed analgesic opioid medication for pain relief who
 uses significantly more of the medication than prescribed, and not only because of persistent
 pain, is engaging in nonmedical opioid use and may have an opioid use disorder. Most
 individuals with opioid use disorder have tolerance and experience withdrawal on abrupt
 cessation or reduction in opioid use. Similar to processes that occur with other psychoactive
 substances, individuals with opioid use disorder often develop conditioned responses to drug
related stimuli (e.g., cue-reactive craving on seeing drug images or paraphernalia). These
 responses probably contribute to relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and typically persist long
 after withdrawal is completed.
 Individuals with opioid use disorder tend to develop such regular patterns of compulsive drug
 use that daily activities are planned around obtaining and administering
 611
 opioids. Prescription opioids used nonmedically can be obtained from family or friends, from
 physicians by falsifying or exaggerating medical problems, by receiving simultaneous
 prescriptions from several physicians, or via purchase on the illegal market. Health care
 professionals with opioid use disorder can obtain opioids by writing prescriptions for themselves
 or by diverting opioids that have been prescribed for individuals or from pharmacy supplies.
 Associated Features
 An attempt to achieve opioid intoxication may result in fatal or nonfatal opioid overdose. Opioid
 overdose is characterized by unconsciousness, respiratory depression, and pinpoint pupils.
 However, opioid overdoses can also occur in the absence of intoxication-seeking drug use.
Opioid overdoses have increased exponentially in the United States since 1999. Up to 2009,
 opioid overdoses were mainly due to prescribed opioids, but since 2010, overdoses due to heroin
 began a sharp rise, and additionally, since 2015, fatal overdoses due to synthetic opioids other
 than methadone (generally fentanyl) have outnumbered overdoses due to prescribed opioids.
 Opioid use disorder can be associated with a history of drug-related crimes (e.g., possession
 or distribution of drugs, forgery, burglary, robbery, larceny, receiving stolen goods). Among
 health care professionals and individuals who have ready access to controlled substances, a
 different pattern of illegal activities may involve problems with state licensing boards,
 professional staffs of hospitals, or other administrative agencies. Marital difficulties (including
 divorce), unemployment, and irregular employment can be associated with opioid use disorder at
 all socioeconomic levels.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of nonmedical prescription opioid use among U.S. adults age 18 and older is
 4.1%–4.7%, with rates of use higher in adults ages 18–25 than in those age 26 and older (5.5%
 vs. 3.4%, respectively). The prevalence of heroin use in the United States is 0.3%–0.4% and is
 higher among adults ages 18–25 (0.5%–0.7%) than in other age groups. In U.S. adolescents ages
 12–17, 2.8%–3.9% use prescription opioids nonmedically, with higher rates in older adolescents
 than in younger adolescents. Heroin use in adolescents is quite low (< 0.05%–0.1%).
 The prevalence of prescription opioid use disorder among U.S. adults age 18 and older
 (DSM-IV or DSM-5 criteria) is 0.6%–0.9%, and the prevalence of heroin use disorder (DSM-IV
 or DSM-5 criteria) is 0.1%–0.3%. Among those ages 12–17, prevalence of prescription opioid
 use disorder is 0.4%, and heroin use disorder is rare (essentially 0%). In the United States, rates
 of opioid use disorder (prescription opioids and heroin) are higher among men than women,
 among young adults than older adults, and among those with lower income or education. Among
 U.S. adults in 2012–2013, the prevalence of nonmedical prescription opioid use disorder varied
 by ethnoracial group: 1.42% in Native Americans, 1.04% in African Americans, 0.96% in non
Latinx Whites, 0.70% in Latinx, and 0.16% in Asian Americans or Pacific Islanders. Rates based
 on household surveys may underestimate national prevalence by omitting individuals in
 institutions and jail or prison, whose rates are likely to be much higher.
 Globally in 2016, there were 26.8 million cases of DSM-IV opioid dependence, with an age
standardized prevalence of 353.0 cases per 100,000 people; prevalence of opioid dependence
 across geographic regions ranged from 0.14% to 0.46%.
 Development and Course
 Opioid use disorder can begin at any age. In the United States, problems associated with opioid
 use are most commonly first observed in the late teens or early 20s, with a longer interval
 between first opioid use and onset of disorder for prescription opioids than for
 612
 heroin. Early use can reflect a desire for relief from life stressors or psychological pain. Long
term studies show that once an opioid use disorder that requires treatment develops, it can
 continue over many years, with brief periods of abstinence in some individuals but long-term
abstinence only in a minority. An exception occurred among U.S. soldiers who became
 dependent on opioids while serving in the Vietnam War; over 90% had long-term abstinence
 from opioids after returning to the United States, although many subsequently experienced
 problems with alcohol, amphetamines, or suicidal thoughts or behavior.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 In addition to an association with more frequent nonmedical prescription opioid use, adult
 prescription opioid use disorder is associated with most other substance use disorders. Opioid use
 disorder is highly associated with externalizing traits such as novelty-seeking, impulsivity, and
 disinhibition. Family, peer, and social environmental factors all increase the risk for opioid use
 disorder. Family and twin studies also indicate a strong genetic contribution to the risk for opioid
 use disorders, although identifying the specific genetic variants contributing to genetic risk has
 been slow. Peer factors may relate to genetic predisposition in terms of how individuals select
 their environments, including their peers.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Individuals from socially oppressed ethnoracial groups were historically overrepresented among
 individuals with opioid use disorder. However, over time, opioid use disorder has become more
 common among White individuals, suggesting that the widespread availability of opioids and
 other social factors (e.g., changes in rates of poverty and unemployment) have an impact on
 prevalence. Consistent with these factors, despite small variations between ethnoracial groups in
 the psychometric performance of opioid use disorder criterion items, the criteria for opioid use
 disorder perform equally well across ethnoracial groups.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Women with opioid use disorder appear more likely than men to have initiated opioid use in
 response to sexual abuse and violence, and they are more likely than men to be introduced to the
 drug by a partner. There is substantial evidence of telescoping among women in that they
 progress to a use disorder more quickly than men after first use; women also appear to be more
 ill when entering treatment facilities than are men, as noted in a large sample of heroin users in
 Italy.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Routine urine toxicology test results are often positive for opioid drugs in individuals with opioid
 use disorder. Urine test results remain positive for most opioids (e.g., heroin, morphine, codeine,
 oxycodone, propoxyphene) for 12–36 hours after administration. Some opioids, such as fentanyl
 and oxycodone, are not detected by standard urine tests (which test for morphine), but can be
 identified by more specialized procedures for several days after use. Similarly, methadone and
 buprenorphine (or buprenorphine/naloxone combinations) will not cause a positive result on
 routine tests for opiates; they require specific tests that can detect these substances for several
 days up to more than 1 week.
 Although not specific markers of opioid use disorder, laboratory evidence of the presence of
 other substances (e.g., cocaine, marijuana, alcohol, amphetamines, benzodiazepines) is common
in heroin users. In addition, screening test results for hepatitis A, B, and C virus are often
 positive in injection opioid users, either for hepatitis antigen (signifying active infection) or for
 hepatitis antibody (signifying past infection). Mildly elevated liver
 613
 function test results are common, either as a result of resolving hepatitis or from toxic injury
 to the liver due to contaminants that have been mixed with the injected opioid. HIV is also
 prevalent in injection opioid users. Subtle changes in cortisol secretion patterns and body
 temperature regulation have been observed for up to 6 months following opioid withdrawal.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Opioid use disorder is associated with a heightened risk for suicide attempts and suicide. Some
 suicide risk factors overlap with risk factors for an opioid use disorder. In addition, repeated
 opioid intoxication or withdrawal may be associated with severe depressions that although
 temporary can be intense enough to lead to suicide attempts and suicide. Nonfatal accidental
 opioid overdose and attempted suicide are distinct phenomena that can be difficult to
 differentiate but should not be mistaken for each other, if possible.
 Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 showed that among drugs of abuse,
 suicide is a common cause of death among regular users of opioids. Evidence suggests that
 suicides are undercounted or often misclassified in opioid-poisoning data. In a study of the
 Veterans Health Administration (VHA) national medical records, after adjustment for psychiatric
 comorbidity, opioid use disorder elevated the risk for suicide mortality, with greater increase in
 risk among women than among men. In another study also using VHA national medical records,
 among veterans prescribed opioids for chronic pain, suicide mortality increased with higher
 opioid doses, even after demographic and clinical factors were taken into account. A follow-up
 of a U.S. national cohort of adults with a history of an opioid overdose found that the
 standardized mortality ratio (SMR; the ratio between the observed number of deaths in a study
 population and the number of deaths that would be expected) was 25.9 for suicide, with a higher
 SMR for women than for men. A review posited that the reasons for the increased risk for
 suicide among opioid users were related to shared risk factors, namely, comorbid mental
 disorders and pain.
 Functional Consequences of Opioid Use Disorder
 Physiologically, opioid use is associated with a lack of mucous membrane secretions, causing
 dry mouth and nose. Slowing of gastrointestinal activity and a decrease in gut motility can
 produce severe constipation. Visual acuity may be impaired as a result of pupillary constriction
 with acute administration. In individuals who inject opioids, sclerosed veins (“tracks”) and
 puncture marks on the lower portions of the upper extremities are common. Veins sometimes
 become so severely sclerosed that peripheral edema develops, and individuals switch to injecting
 in veins in the legs, neck, or groin. When these veins become unusable, individuals often inject
 directly into their subcutaneous tissue (“skin-popping”), resulting in cellulitis, abscesses, and
 circular-appearing scars from healed skin lesions. Tetanus and Clostridium botulinum infections
 are rare but serious consequences of injecting opioids, especially with contaminated needles.
Infections may also occur in other organs and include bacterial endocarditis, hepatitis, and HIV
 infection. Hepatitis C infections, for example, may occur in up to 90% of individuals who inject
 opioids. In addition, the prevalence of HIV infection is high among individuals who inject drugs,
 a large proportion of whom are individuals with opioid use disorder. For example, HIV infection
 rates are as high as 60% among heroin users in some areas of the United States and the Russian
 Federation. However, the incidence may be much lower in areas where access to clean injection
 material and paraphernalia is facilitated.
 Tuberculosis is a particularly serious problem among individuals who use drugs
 intravenously, especially those who are dependent on heroin; infection is usually asymptomatic
 and evident only by the presence of a positive tuberculin skin test or tuberculosis blood test
 (interferon gamma release assay). However, many cases of active tuberculosis have been found,
 especially among those who are infected with HIV. These individuals
 614
 often have a newly acquired infection but also are likely to experience reactivation of a prior
 infection because of impaired immune function.
 Individuals who sniff heroin or other opioids into the nose (insufflation, or “snorting”) often
 develop irritation of the nasal mucosa, sometimes accompanied by perforation of the nasal
 septum. Difficulties in sexual functioning are common. Males often experience erectile
 dysfunction during intoxication or chronic use. Females commonly have disturbances of
 reproductive function and irregular menses.
 Although acute opioid use produces analgesia, chronic use can produce hyperalgesia (opioid
induced hyperalgesia), a condition characterized by increased sensitivity to pain. Physiological
 dependence on opioids may occur in about half of the infants born to females with opioid use
 disorder. This can produce a severe withdrawal syndrome in the neonate requiring medical
 treatment and has increased markedly in prevalence.
 The mortality rate in individuals with opioid use disorder is 6–20 times greater than in the
 general population. Fatal overdoses due to prescription opioids increased dramatically in the
 United States since 1999, with almost 400,000 such deaths occurring since then, and the rate of
 such overdoses is now five times higher than in 1999. Fatal overdoses due to heroin began a
 sharp increase in 2010, and since 2013, fatal overdoses due to synthetic opioids (e.g., fentanyl)
 increased so sharply that these rates were almost double the rates for prescription opioid or
 heroin overdoses by 2017. Nonfatal opioid overdoses resulting in hospitalization and emergency
 department visits have increased as well. Although not all risk factors for opioid use disorder and
 opioid overdose are the same, substantial overlap exists, making the risk for overdose one of the
 most serious potential consequences of opioid use disorder. Individuals with opioid use disorder
 are also at increased risk for mortality from many medical conditions (e.g., hepatitis, HIV
 infection, tuberculosis, cardiovascular disease). Death can also result from accidents, injuries, or
 other general medical complications.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders.
 Opioid use disorder is
 differentiated from opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders
(e.g., opioid-induced depressive disorder) in that opioid use disorder describes a problematic
 pattern of opioid use that involves impaired control over opioid use, social impairment
 attributable to opioid use, risky opioid use (e.g., continued opioid use despite medical
 complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal),
 whereas opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders describe
 psychiatric syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Opioid intoxication, opioid
 withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with opioid use
 disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or opioid-induced
 mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of opioid use disorder, the presence of
 which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 Other substance intoxication.
 Alcohol intoxication and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 intoxication can cause a clinical picture that resembles that of opioid intoxication. A diagnosis of
 alcohol or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication can usually be made based on the
 absence of pupillary constriction or the lack of a response to naloxone challenge. In some cases,
 intoxication may be due both to opioids and to alcohol or other sedatives. In these cases, the
 naloxone challenge will not reverse all of the sedative effects.
 Other withdrawal disorders.
 The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid withdrawal
 resemble symptoms seen in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid withdrawal is also
 accompanied by rhinorrhea, lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which are not seen in sedative
type withdrawal. Dilated pupils are also seen in hallucinogen intoxication and stimulant
 intoxication. However, other signs or symptoms of opioid
 615
 withdrawal, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, or lacrimation,
 are not present.
 Independent mental disorders.
 Some of the effects of opioid use may resemble symptoms (e.g.,
 depressed mood) of an independent mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder).
 Opioids are less likely to produce symptoms of mental disturbance than are most other drugs of
 abuse.
 Comorbidity
 Other than overdose, the most common medical comorbidities associated with opioid use
 disorder are viral (e.g., HIV, hepatitis C virus) and bacterial infections, particularly among
 injection heroin users. These infections are less common in prescription opioid use disorder.
 Research with nationally representative samples of the U.S. population has found that opioid
 use disorder is often associated with other substance use disorders, especially those involving
 tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, stimulants, and benzodiazepines. Individuals with opioid use disorder
 are at risk for the development of persistent depressive disorder or major depressive disorder.
 These symptoms may represent an opioid-induced depressive disorder or an exacerbation of a
 preexisting independent depressive disorder. Periods of depression are especially common
 during chronic intoxication or in association with physical or psychosocial stressors related to the
 opioid use disorder. Insomnia is also common, especially during withdrawal. Opioid use disorder
 is also associated with bipolar I disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and antisocial, borderline,
and schizotypal personality disorders. A history of conduct disorder in childhood or adolescence
 has also been identified as a significant risk factor for substance-related disorders, especially
 opioid use disorder. Further, prescription opioid use disorder and heroin use disorder are
 generally associated with serious mental illness, defined as a mental disorder other than a
 substance use disorder that results in serious functional impairment substantially limiting or
 interfering with major life activities.