 Comorbidity
 Although ADHD is more common in males, females with ADHD have higher rates of a number
 of comorbid disorders, particularly oppositional defiant disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and
 personality and substance use disorders. Oppositional defiant disorder co-occurs with ADHD in
 approximately half of children with the combined presentation and about a quarter with the
 predominantly inattentive presentation. Conduct disorder co-occurs in about a quarter of children
or adolescents with the combined presentation, depending on age and setting. Most children and
 adolescents with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also meet criteria
 for ADHD; a lesser percentage of children with ADHD have symptoms that meet criteria for
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, obsessive
compulsive disorder, and intermittent explosive disorder occur in a minority of individuals with
 ADHD but more often than in the general population. Although substance use disorders are
 relatively more frequent among adults with ADHD in the general population, the disorders are
 present in only a minority of adults with ADHD. In adults, antisocial and other personality
 disorders may co-occur with ADHD.
 ADHD may co-occur in variable symptom profiles with other neurodevelopmental disorders,
 including specific learning disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
 disorder, language disorders, developmental coordination disorder, and tic disorders.
 Comorbid sleep disorders in ADHD are associated with daytime impairments in cognition
 (e.g., inattention). Many individuals with ADHD report daytime sleepiness that may meet criteria
 for hypersomnolence disorder. One quarter to one-half of individuals with ADHD report sleep
 difficulties; studies have shown an association of ADHD with insomnia, circadian rhythm sleep
wake disorder, sleep-disordered breathing, and restless legs syndrome.
 Individuals with ADHD have been found to have elevated rates of a number of medical
 conditions, particularly allergy and autoimmune disorders, as well as epilepsy