Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use leading to clinically
 significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following,
 occurring within a 12-month period:
 1. Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are often taken in larger amounts or over
 a longer period than was intended.
 2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
 3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic; use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic; or recover
 from its effects.
 4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
 5. Recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use resulting in a failure to fulfill
 major role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from
 work or poor work performance related to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 use; sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related absences, suspensions, or
 expulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
 6. Continued sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use despite having persistent or
 recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the
 effects of sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics (e.g., arguments with a spouse
 about consequences of intoxication; physical fights).
 7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
 reduced because of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
 8. Recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use in situations in which it is
 physically hazardous (e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine
 when impaired by sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use).
 9. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use is continued despite knowledge of having
 a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to
 have been caused or exacerbated by the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
 10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
 a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic to achieve intoxication or desired effect.
 b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
 the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
 621
 Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for individuals taking
 sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics under medical supervision.
 11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
 a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for sedatives, hypnotics, or
 anxiolytics (refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria set for sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal).
b. Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics (or a closely related substance, such
 as alcohol) are taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
 Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for individuals taking
 sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics under medical supervision.
 Specify if:
 In early remission: After full criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12
 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge
 to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic,” may be met).
 In sustained remission: After full criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 use disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic use disorder have been met at any time during a period of 12 months
 or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or
 urge to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic,” may be met).
 Specify if:
 In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
 in an environment where access to sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics is
 restricted.
 Code based on current severity/remission: If a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or another sedative-,
 hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
 below for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Instead, the comorbid
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the
 sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced disorder (see the coding note for sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or
 specific sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorder). For example, if
 there is comorbid sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder and
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, only the sedative-, hypnotic-, or
 anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character
 indicating whether the comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is mild,
 moderate, or severe: F13.14 for mild sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
 with sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder or F13.24 for a
 moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder with sedative-,
 hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder.
 Specify current severity/remission:
 F13.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
 F13.11 Mild, In early remission
 F13.11 Mild, In sustained remission
 F13.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
 F13.21 Moderate, In early remission
F13.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
 F13.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
 F13.21 Severe, In early remission
 F13.21 Severe, In sustained remission
 622
 Specifiers
 “In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
 in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
 or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
 closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
 Diagnostic Features
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances include benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine-like drugs
 (e.g., zolpidem, zaleplon), carbamates (e.g., glutethimide, meprobamate), barbiturates (e.g.,
 secobarbital), and barbiturate-like hypnotics (e.g., glutethimide, methaqualone, propofol). This
 class of substances includes most prescription sleeping medications and most prescription
 antianxiety medications. Nonbenzodiazepine antianxiety agents (e.g., buspirone, gepirone) are
 not included in this class because they do not appear to be associated with significant misuse.
 Like alcohol, these agents are brain depressants and can produce similar
 substance/medication-induced and substance use disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 substances are available both by prescription and illegally. Some individuals who obtain these
 substances by prescription will develop a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, while
 others who misuse these substances or use them for intoxication will not develop a use disorder.
 In particular, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics with rapid onset or short to intermediate lengths
 of action may be taken for intoxication purposes, although longer-acting substances in this class
 may be taken for intoxication as well.
 Craving (Criterion A4), either during periods of active use or during periods of abstinence, is
 a typical feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Misuse of substances from this
 class may occur in conjunction with use of other substances. For example, individuals may use
 intoxicating doses of sedatives or benzodiazepines to “come down” from cocaine or
 amphetamines or use high doses of benzodiazepines in combination with methadone to “boost”
 its effects.
 Repeated absences or poor work performance, school absences, suspensions or expulsions,
 and neglect of children or household (Criterion A5) may be related to sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic use disorder; the continued use of the substances despite arguments with a spouse
 about consequences of intoxication or despite physical fights (Criterion A6) may also occur.
 Limiting contact with family or friends, avoiding work or school, or stopping participation in
 hobbies, sports, or games (Criterion A7) and recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use when
 driving an automobile or operating machinery when impaired by such use (Criterion A8) are also
 seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
 Very significant levels of tolerance and withdrawal can develop to sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic substances. There may be evidence of tolerance and withdrawal in the absence of a
 diagnosis of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in an individual who has abruptly
 discontinued use of benzodiazepines that were taken for long periods of time at prescribed and
 therapeutic doses. In these cases, an additional diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder is made only if other criteria are met. That is, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 medications may be prescribed for appropriate medical purposes, and depending on the dose
 regimen, these drugs may then produce tolerance and withdrawal. If these drugs are prescribed or
 recommended for appropriate medical purposes, and if they are used as prescribed, the resulting
 tolerance or withdrawal does not count toward the diagnosis of a substance use disorder.
 However, it is necessary to determine whether the drugs were inappropriately prescribed and
 used (e.g., falsifying medical symptoms to obtain the medication; using more medication than
 prescribed; obtaining the medication from several doctors without informing them).
 Given the unidimensional nature of the symptoms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder, severity is based on the number of criteria endorsed.
 623
 Associated Features
 Research with nationally representative samples of the U.S. population has found that sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is often associated with other substance use disorders (e.g.,
 alcohol, cannabis, opioid, stimulant use disorders). Sedatives are often used to alleviate the
 unwanted effects of these other substances. With repeated use of the sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic, tolerance develops to the sedative effects, and a progressively higher dose is used.
 However, tolerance to brain stem depressant effects develops much more slowly, and as the
 individual takes more substance to achieve euphoria or other desired effects, there may be a
 sudden onset of respiratory depression and hypotension, which may result in death. Intense or
 repeated sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication may be associated with severe depression
 that although temporary can lead to suicide attempt and suicide.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in the United
 States is estimated to be 0.3% among adolescents ages 12–17 years and adults age 18 years and
 older, and this prevalence has remained stable nationally despite increases in rates of prescription
 of these medications. Rates of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in the
 United States have not been shown to vary consistently by gender, but data from other countries
 have generally found higher rates among girls and women than boys and men. The 12-month
 prevalence of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in the United States
 decreases as a function of age and is greatest among individuals ages 18–29 years (0.5%) and
 lowest among individuals 65 years and older (0.04%).
 Twelve-month prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use, misuse (e.g., use without a
 prescription), or disorder varies across U.S. ethnoracial groups. For instance, 12-month
 prevalence estimates for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic misuse across ethnoracial groups range
 from 0.6% to 2.5% for adolescents ages 12–17 years and 0.7% to 10.1% for adults.
Development and Course
 The usual course of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder involves individuals in their
 teens or 20s who escalate their occasional use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents to the
 point at which they develop problems that meet criteria for a diagnosis. This pattern may be
 especially likely among individuals who have other substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol,
 opioids, stimulants). An initial pattern of intermittent use socially (e.g., at parties) can lead to
 daily use and high levels of tolerance. Once this occurs, an increasing level of interpersonal
 difficulties can be expected, as well as increasingly severe episodes of cognitive dysfunction and
 physiological withdrawal.
 The second and less frequently observed clinical course begins with an individual who
 originally obtained the medication by prescription from a physician, usually for the treatment of
 anxiety, insomnia, or somatic complaints. As either tolerance or a need for higher doses of the
 medication develops, there is a gradual increase in the dose and frequency of self-administration.
 The individual is likely to continue to justify use on the basis of original anxiety or insomnia
 symptoms, but substance-seeking behavior becomes more prominent, and the individual may
 seek out multiple physicians to obtain sufficient supplies of the medication. Tolerance can reach
 high levels, and withdrawal (including seizures and withdrawal delirium) may occur.
 As with many substance use disorders, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
 generally has an onset during adolescence or early adult life. Although the risk for misuse and
 use disorder decreases with age after about age 30, side effects associated with psychoactive
 substances may increase as individuals age. In particular, cognitive impairment increases as a
 side effect with age, and the metabolism of sedatives, hypnotics, or
 624
 anxiolytics decreases with age among older individuals. Both acute and chronic toxic effects
 of these substances, especially effects on cognition, memory, and motor coordination, are likely
 to increase with age as a consequence of pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic age-related
 changes. Individuals with major neurocognitive disorder are more likely to develop intoxication
 and impaired physiological functioning at lower doses. Because sedatives, hypnotics, and
 anxiolytics are often used in combination with other psychoactive substances, it can be difficult
 to ascertain whether the functional consequences are attributable to a single substance (e.g.,
 sedative) or to the use of multiple substances.
 Deliberate intoxication to achieve a “high” is most likely to be observed in teenagers and
 individuals in their 20s. Problems associated with sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are also
 seen in individuals in their 40s and older who escalate the dose of prescribed medications. In
 older individuals, intoxication can resemble a progressive major neurocognitive disorder.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Impulsivity and novelty seeking are individual temperaments that relate to the
 propensity to develop a substance use disorder but may themselves be genetically determined.
 Personality disorders can also increase the risk of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic misuse or use
 disorder.
 Environmental.
 Because sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are all medications, a key risk factor
relates to availability of the substances, both through an individual’s own prescriptions and from
 prescriptions dispensed to family and friends. In the United States, the historical patterns of
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic misuse relate to broad prescribing patterns. For instance, a
 marked decrease in prescription of barbiturates was associated with an increase in
 benzodiazepine prescriptions. Peer factors may relate to genetic predisposition in terms of how
 individuals select their environment. Other individuals at heightened risk might include those
 with alcohol use disorder who may receive repeated prescriptions in response to their complaints
 of alcohol-related anxiety or insomnia.
 Genetic and physiological.
 As with other substance use disorders, the risk for sedative, hypnotic,
 or anxiolytic use disorder has been found in U.S.-based twin registry studies to be related to
 individual, family, peer, social, and environmental factors. Within these domains, genetic factors
 play a particularly important role both directly and indirectly. Overall, across development,
 genetic factors seem to play a larger role in the onset of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder as individuals age through puberty into adult life.
 Course modifiers.
 In nationally representative U.S. studies, early onset of use is associated with
 greater likelihood for developing a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Prescription patterns (and availability) of this class of substances vary across countries and
 populations, which may lead to variations in prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder. In the United States, use of benzodiazepines has been more frequently reported by non
Latinx Whites than Latinx or African Americans. However, risk of the disorder may vary within
 populations exposed to these substances. For example, the 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV
 benzodiazepine use disorder among U.S. individuals who used benzodiazepines was higher
 among African Americans (3.0%) and non-Latinx “others” (2.6%) than among non-Latinx
 Whites (1.3%).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Although estimates from individual studies vary, there appear to be no gender differences in the
 prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
 625
 Diagnostic Markers
 Almost all sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances can be identified through laboratory
 evaluations of urine or blood (the latter of which can quantify the amounts of these agents in the
 body). Urine test results are likely to remain positive for up to approximately 1 week after the
 use of long-acting substances, such as diazepam or flurazepam.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 U.S. epidemiological studies show that hypnotics are associated with suicide, but it is unclear if
 this association is attributable to underlying psychiatric conditions such as depression and
 insomnia, which are themselves risk factors for suicide.
Functional Consequences of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use
 Disorder
 The social and interpersonal consequences of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
 mimic those of alcohol in terms of the potential for disinhibited behavior. Accidents,
 interpersonal difficulties, and interference with work or school performance are common
 outcomes. The disinhibiting effects of these agents, like alcohol, may potentially contribute to
 overly aggressive behavior and arguments or fights, with subsequent interpersonal and legal
 problems. Physical examination is likely to reveal evidence of a mild decrease in most aspects of
 autonomic nervous system functioning, including a slower pulse, a slightly decreased respiratory
 rate, and a slight drop in blood pressure (most likely to occur with postural changes).
 Acute intoxication can result in accidental injuries and automobile accidents. There may be
 consequences of trauma (e.g., internal bleeding, a subdural hematoma) from accidents that occur
 while intoxicated. For elderly individuals, even short-term use of these sedating medications at
 prescribed doses may be associated with an increased risk for cognitive problems and falls. The
 association of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications with increased risk of major
 neurocognitive disorder remains unclear.
 At high doses, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances can be lethal, particularly when
 mixed with other central nervous system depressants, such as opioids or alcohol, although the
 lethal dosage varies considerably among the specific substances. Intravenous use of these
 substances can result in medical complications related to the use of contaminated needles (e.g.,
 hepatitis, HIV).
 Accidental or deliberate overdoses, similar to those observed for alcohol use disorder or
 repeated alcohol intoxication, can occur. Overdoses may be associated with a deterioration in
 vital signs that signals an impending medical emergency (e.g., respiratory arrest from
 barbiturates). In contrast to their wide margin of safety when used alone, benzodiazepines taken
 in combination with opioids and alcohol can be particularly dangerous, and accidental overdoses
 are reported commonly in U.S. data. Accidental overdoses have also been reported in individuals
 who deliberately misuse barbiturates and other nonbenzodiazepine sedatives (e.g.,
 methaqualone), but because these agents are much less available than the benzodiazepines, the
 frequency of overdosing is low in most settings.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and
 sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is differentiated from sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or
 anxiolytic-induced mental disorders (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive
 disorder) in that sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder describes a problematic pattern
 626
 of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use that involves impaired control over such use; social
 impairment attributable to this use; risky sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use (e.g., driving while
 intoxicated); and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal);
 whereas sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
Other medical conditions.
 Alcohol use disorder.
 Clinically appropriate use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications.
 withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
 syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication;
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced
 mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
 disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or a sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental
 disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, and anxiolytic use
 disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
 The slurred speech, incoordination, and other associated features
 characteristic of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication could be the result of another
 medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis) or of a prior head trauma (e.g., a subdural hematoma).
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder must be differentiated from
 alcohol use disorder. The differential diagnosis is determined mostly through clinical history,
 although liver damage and other potential signs of chronic alcohol toxicity (e.g.,
 cardiomyopathy) can also be more suggestive of alcohol use disorder than of sedative, hypnotic,
 or anxiolytic use disorder.
 Individuals may continue to
 take benzodiazepine medication according to a physician’s direction for a legitimate medical
 indication over extended periods of time. Even if physiological signs of tolerance or withdrawal
 are manifested, many of these individuals do not develop symptoms that meet the criteria for
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder because they are not preoccupied with obtaining
 the substance and its use does not interfere with their performance of usual social or occupational
 roles.
 Comorbidity
 Nonmedical use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents is associated with alcohol use
 disorder, tobacco use disorder, and, generally, illicit drug use. There may also be an overlap
 between sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder and antisocial personality disorder;
 depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders; and other substance use disorders, such as alcohol use
 disorder and illicit drug use disorders. Antisocial behavior and antisocial personality disorder are
 especially associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder when the substances are
 obtained illegally. Comorbidity with other substance use disorders and other psychiatric
 disorders increases the risk of transition from sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use to use disorder
 and decreases the probability of remission.