Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recent use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
 B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment)
 that developed during, or shortly after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
 627
 C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly
 after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use:
 1. Slurred speech.
 2. Incoordination.
 3. Unsteady gait.
 4. Nystagmus.
 5. Impairment in cognition (e.g., attention, memory).
 6. Stupor or coma.
 D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
 not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
 another substance.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid
 sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. If a mild sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.120, and if a
 moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the
 ICD-10-CM code is F13.220. If there is no comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F13.920.
 Note: For information on Development and Course; Risk and Prognostic Factors;
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues; Diagnostic Markers; Functional Consequences of
 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication; and Comorbidity, see the corresponding
 sections in Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication is the presence of clinically
 significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or
 aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational
 functioning) that develop during, or shortly after, use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
 (Criteria A and B). As with other brain depressants, such as alcohol, these behaviors may be
 accompanied by slurred speech, incoordination (at levels that can interfere with driving abilities
 and with performing usual activities to the point of causing falls or automobile accidents), an
 unsteady gait, nystagmus, impairment in cognition (e.g., attentional or memory problems), and
 stupor or coma (Criterion C). Memory impairment is a prominent feature of sedative, hypnotic,
 or anxiolytic intoxication and is most often characterized by an anterograde amnesia that
 resembles “alcoholic blackouts,” which can be disturbing to the individual. The symptoms must
 not be attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental
 disorder (Criterion D). Intoxication may occur in individuals who are receiving these substances
 by prescription, are borrowing the medication from friends or relatives, or are deliberately taking
the substance to achieve intoxication. Because sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics are often
 used in combination with other psychoactive substances, it can be difficult to ascertain whether
 the functional consequences are attributable to a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic or to the use of
 multiple substances.
 Associated Features
 Associated features include taking more medication than prescribed, taking multiple different
 medications, or mixing sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents with alcohol, which can markedly
 increase the effects of these agents.
 Prevalence
 The prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication in the general population is
 unknown. However, it is probable that most nonmedical users of sedatives, hypnotics,
 628
 or anxiolytics would at some time have signs or symptoms that meet criteria for sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; if so, then the prevalence of nonmedical sedative, hypnotic,
 or anxiolytic use in the general population may be similar to the prevalence of sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication. For example, in 2018, tranquilizers or sedative were used
 nonmedically in the United States by 2.4% of individuals age 12 or older and 4.9% of those ages
 18–25.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Alcohol use disorder.
 Because the clinical presentations may be identical, distinguishing sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication from alcohol use disorder requires evidence for recent
 ingestion of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications by self-report, informant report, or
 toxicological testing. Many individuals who misuse sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may also
 misuse alcohol and other substances, and so multiple intoxication diagnoses are possible.
 Alcohol intoxication.
 Alcohol intoxication may be distinguished from sedative, hypnotic, or
 anxiolytic intoxication by the smell of alcohol on the breath. Otherwise, the features of the two
 disorders may be similar.
 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
 Sedative, 
hypnotic, 
or 
anxiolytic
 intoxication is distinguished from sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders
 (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal)
 because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in the latter disorders are in excess of those usually
 associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; predominate in the clinical
 presentation; and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
 Neurocognitive disorders.
 In situations of cognitive impairment, traumatic brain injury, and
 delirium from other causes, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may be intoxicating at quite low
 dosages. The differential diagnosis in these complex settings is based on the predominant
 syndrome. An additional diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication may be
 appropriate even if the substance has been ingested at a low dosage in the setting of these other
(or similar) co-occurring conditions.
 Comorbidity
 Given the typical overlap of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication with sedative,
 hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
 Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.