Differential Diagnosis
 Nonconformity to gender roles.
 Gender dysphoria should be distinguished from simple
 nonconformity to stereotypical gender role behavior by the strong desire to be of another gender
 than the assigned one and by the extent and pervasiveness of gender-variant activities and
 interests. The diagnosis is not meant to merely describe nonconformity to stereotypical gender
 role behavior (e.g., “tomboyism” in girls, “girly-boy” behavior in boys, occasional cross-dressing
 in adult men). Given the increased openness of gender-diverse expressions by individuals across
 the entire range of the transgender spectrum, it is important that the clinical diagnosis be limited
 to those individuals whose distress and impairment meet the specified criteria.
 Transvestic disorder.
 Transvestic disorder is diagnosed in heterosexual (or bisexual) adolescent
 and adult males (rarely in females) for whom women’s clothing generates sexual excitement and
 causes distress and/or impairment without drawing their assigned gender into question. It is
 occasionally accompanied by gender dysphoria. An individual with transvestic disorder who also
 has clinically significant gender dysphoria can be given both diagnoses. In some cases of
 postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria in individuals assigned male at birth who are attracted to
 women, cross-dressing with sexual excitement is a precursor to the diagnosis of gender
 dysphoria.
 Body dysmorphic disorder.
 An individual with body dysmorphic disorder focuses on the alteration
 or removal of a specific body part because it is perceived as abnormally formed, not because it
 represents a repudiated assigned gender. When an individual’s presentation meets criteria for
 both gender dysphoria and body dysmorphic disorder, both diagnoses can be given. Individuals
 wishing to have a healthy limb amputated (termed by some body integrity identity disorder)
 because it makes them feel more “complete” usually do not wish to change gender, but rather
 desire to live as an amputee or a disabled person.
 Autism spectrum disorder.
 In individuals with autism spectrum disorder, diagnosing gender
 dysphoria can be challenging. It can be difficult to differentiate potential co-occurring
 520
Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
 Other clinical presentations.
 gender dysphoria from an autistic preoccupation because of the concrete and rigid thinking
 around gender roles and/or poor understanding of social relationships characteristic of autism
 spectrum disorder.
 In schizophrenia, there may rarely be delusions of
 belonging to some other gender. In the absence of psychotic symptoms, insistence by an
 individual with gender dysphoria that he or she is another gender is not considered a delusion.
 Schizophrenia (or other psychotic disorders) and gender dysphoria may co-occur. Gender
themed delusions may occur in up to 20% of individuals with schizophrenia. They can usually be
 differentiated from gender dysphoria by their bizarre content and by waxing and waning with
 remissions and exacerbations of psychotic episodes.
 Some individuals with an emasculinization desire who develop an
 alternative, nonmale/nonfemale gender identity do have a presentation that meets criteria for
 gender dysphoria. However, some males seek genital surgery for either aesthetic reasons or to
 remove psychological effects of androgens without changing male identity; in these cases, the
 criteria for gender dysphoria are not met.