Bipolar and related disorders are found between the chapters on schizophrenia
 spectrum and other psychotic disorders and depressive disorders in DSM-5-TR in recognition of
 their place as a bridge between those two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomatology, family
 history, and genetics. The diagnoses included in this chapter are bipolar I disorder, bipolar II
 disorder, cyclothymic disorder, substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder,
 bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, other specified bipolar and related
 disorder, and unspecified bipolar and related disorder.
 The bipolar I disorder criteria represent the modern understanding of the classic manic
depressive disorder or affective psychosis described in the nineteenth century, differing from that
 classic description only to the extent that neither psychosis nor the lifetime experience of a major
 depressive episode is a requirement. However, the vast majority of individuals whose symptoms
 meet the criteria for a fully syndromal manic episode also experience major depressive episodes
 during the course of their lives.
 Bipolar II disorder, requiring the lifetime experience of at least one major depressive episode
 and at least one hypomanic episode (but no history of mania), is no longer thought to be a less
 severe condition than bipolar I disorder, largely because of the burden of depression in bipolar II
 disorder and because the instability of mood experienced by individuals with bipolar II disorder
 is often accompanied by serious impairment in work and social functioning.
 The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is given to adults who experience at least 2 years (for
 children, a full year) of both hypomanic and depressive periods without ever fulfilling the criteria
 for an episode of mania, hypomania, or major depression.
 A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several medical
 conditions can be associated with manic-like phenomena. This fact is recognized in the
 diagnoses of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and bipolar and related
 disorder due to another medical condition.
 The recognition that there are individuals who experience bipolar-like phenomena with
 symptoms that do not meet the criteria for bipolar I, bipolar II, or cyclothymic disorder is
 reflected in the availability of the other specified bipolar and related disorder category. Specific
 criteria for a disorder involving short-duration hypomania are provided in Section III in the hope
 of encouraging further study of this presentation of bipolar disorder symptomatology and its
 course.