 Substance/Medication-Induced Bipolar and Related
 Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
 picture and is characterized by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
 and abnormally increased activity or energy.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by a bipolar or related disorder that is not
 substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent bipolar or
 related disorder could include the following:
 The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
 the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
 evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non
substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder (e.g., a history of
 recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
clinical attention.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 bipolar and related disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder
 present for the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate
 diagnosis of a substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder
 is comorbid with the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder, the 4th position
 character is “1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder”
 before the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use
 disorder with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder”). If a moderate or severe
 substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced bipolar and related
 disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate
 [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the
 severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance
 use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th
 position character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance-induced
 bipolar and related disorder.
 163
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.14 F10.24 F10.94
 Phencyclidine F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
 Other hallucinogen F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.14 F13.24 F13.94
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.14 F15.24 F15.94
 Cocaine F14.14 F14.24 F14.94
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.14 F19.24 F19.94
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
 substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
 medication.
Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder begins with the
 specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the bipolar
 mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set,
 which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder.
 For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other
 (or unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
 etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
 used.
 When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
 listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced bipolar
 and related disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
 during withdrawal). For example, in the case of irritable symptoms occurring during intoxication
 in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine use disorder
 with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication. A separate
 diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
 bipolar and related disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one
time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.94
 amphetamine-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more
 than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of bipolar mood
 symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use disorder
 with methylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication;
 F19.94 dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication).
 164
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder is a prominent
 and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized
 by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally increased activity or energy
 (Criterion A); these symptoms are judged to be attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a
 drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure) (Criterion B).
 To meet criteria for the diagnosis, the abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and
 increased activity or energy must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
 withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, as evidenced by clinical
 history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B1), and the involved
 substance/medication must be capable of producing the abnormally elevated, expansive, or
 irritable mood and increased activity or energy (Criterion B2). In addition, the abnormally
 elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and increased activity or energy are not better explained
 by a non-substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 Evidence of an independent bipolar and related disorder includes the observation that the
 abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and increased activity or energy preceded the
 onset of substance/medication use, the symptoms persist beyond a substantial period of time after
 the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication (i.e., usually longer than 1 month), or
there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent non-substance/medication
induced bipolar and related disorder (Criterion C), such as a history of recurrent non-substance
induced manic episodes. Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
 should not be made when symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion
 D). Finally, the diagnosis requires that the substance/medication-induced symptoms cause
 clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
 functioning (Criterion E). The substance-induced bipolar and related disorder diagnosis should
 be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the
 symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to
 warrant independent clinical attention.
 A key exception to the diagnosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related
 disorder is the case of hypomania or mania that occurs after antidepressant medication use or
 other treatments and persists beyond the physiological effects of the medication. The persistence
 of hypomania or mania is considered an indicator of true bipolar disorder, not
 substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder. Similarly, individuals with apparent
 electroconvulsive therapy–induced manic or hypomanic episodes that persist beyond the
 physiological effects of the treatment are diagnosed with bipolar disorder, not
 substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder. Furthermore, substance/medication
induced bipolar and related symptoms may suggest an underlying bipolar diathesis in individuals
 previously not diagnosed with bipolar disorders.
 Side effects of some antidepressants and other psychotropic drugs (e.g., edginess, agitation)
 may resemble the primary symptoms of a manic syndrome, but they are fundamentally distinct
 from bipolar symptoms and are insufficient for the diagnosis. That is, the criterion symptoms of
 mania/hypomania have specificity (simple agitation is not the same as excess involvement in
 purposeful activities), and a sufficient number of symptoms must be present (not just one or two
 symptoms) to make these diagnoses. In particular, the appearance of one or two nonspecific
 symptoms—irritability, edginess, or agitation during antidepressant treatment—in the absence of
 a full manic or hypomanic syndrome should not be taken to support a diagnosis of a bipolar
 disorder.
 Associated Features
 Substances/medications that are typically considered to be associated with substance/medication
induced bipolar and related disorder include the stimulant class of drugs, as
 165
 well as phencyclidine and steroids; however, a number of potential substances continue to
 emerge as new compounds are synthesized (e.g., so-called bath salts).
 Prevalence
 Limited epidemiological data exist regarding the prevalence of substance/medication-induced
 mania or bipolar disorder. Prevalence of substance-induced bipolar disorder will depend on
 substance availability and level of substance use in a society; for example, countries with cultural
 prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may have a lower prevalence of substance
related disorders.
 Development and Course
 In phencyclidine-induced mania, the initial presentation may be one of a delirium with affective
 features, which then becomes an atypically appearing manic or mixed manic state. This condition
 follows the ingestion or inhalation quickly, usually within hours or, at the most, a few days. In
 stimulant-induced manic or hypomanic states, the response is in minutes to 1 hour after one or
 several ingestions or injections. The episode is very brief and typically resolves over 1–2 days.
 With corticosteroids and some immunosuppressant medications, the mania (or mixed or
 depressed state) usually follows several days of ingestion, and the higher doses appear to have a
 much greater likelihood of producing bipolar symptoms.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Determination of the substance of use can be made through markers in the blood or urine to
 corroborate diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder should be differentiated from other
 bipolar disorders, substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, substance-induced delirium, and
 medication side effects (as noted earlier). A full manic episode that emerges during
 antidepressant treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully
 syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
 bipolar I diagnosis. A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
 medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond the
 physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a bipolar II diagnosis only if
 preceded by a major depressive episode.
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Euphoria, irritability, and increased energy may
 occur in substance intoxication (e.g., stimulant intoxication) or substance withdrawal (e.g.,
 cannabis withdrawal). The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific
 withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of
 substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder either with onset during intoxication
 or with onset during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication
 or substance withdrawal when the euphoric or irritable mood or increased energy symptoms are
 predominant in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
 Comorbidity
 Comorbidities are those associated with the use of illicit substances (in the case of illegal
 stimulants or phencyclidine) or diversion of prescribed stimulants. Comorbidities related to
 steroid or immunosuppressant medications are those medical indications for these preparations.
 Delirium can occur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals ingesting phencyclidine
 or those who are prescribed steroid medications or other immunosuppressant medications.
 166
