Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical
 Condition
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
 picture and is characterized by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
 and abnormally increased activity or energy.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
 medical condition.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning, or necessitates
 hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
 Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).
 Specify if:
 F06.33 With manic features: Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanic
 episode.
 F06.33 With manic- or hypomanic-like episode: Full criteria are met except
 Criterion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanic episode.
 F06.34 With mixed features: Symptoms of depression are also present but do
 not predominate in the clinical picture.
 Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
 mental disorder (e.g., F06.33 bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic
 features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately
 immediately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition
 (e.g., E05.90 hyperthyroidism; F06.33 bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with
 manic features).
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
 presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable
 mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical picture
 (Criterion A) that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the
 manic or hypomanic picture may appear during the initial presentation of the medical condition
 (i.e., within 1 month); however, there are exceptions, especially in chronic medical conditions
 that might worsen or relapse and herald the appearance of the manic or hypomanic picture.
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diagnosed when the
manic or hypomanic episodes definitely preceded the medical condition, because the proper
 diagnosis would be bipolar disorder (except in the unusual circumstance in which all preceding
 manic or hypomanic episodes—or, when only one such episode has occurred, the preceding
 manic or hypomanic episode—were associated with ingestion of a substance/medication). The
 diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition should not be made
 during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The manic or hypomanic episode in bipolar and
 related disorder due to another medical condition must cause clinically significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning to qualify for this
 diagnosis (Criterion E).
 167
 Associated Features
 The listing of medical conditions that are said to be able to induce mania is never complete, and
 the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis. Among the best known of the
 medical conditions that can cause a bipolar manic or hypomanic condition are Cushing’s disease
 and multiple sclerosis, as well as stroke and traumatic brain injuries. Antibodies to the N-methyl
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor have been associated with manic or mixed mood and psychotic
 symptoms. In such cases, the causative medical condition would be anti-NMDA receptor
 encephalitis.
 Development and Course
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition usually has its onset acutely or
 subacutely within the first weeks or month of the onset of the associated medical condition.
 However, this is not always the case, as a worsening or later relapse of the associated medical
 condition may precede the onset of the manic or hypomanic syndrome. The clinician must make
 a clinical judgment in these situations about whether the medical condition is causative, based on
 temporal sequence as well as plausibility of a causal relationship. Finally, the condition may
 remit before or just after the medical condition remits, particularly when treatment of the
 manic/hypomanic symptoms is effective.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Culture-related differences, to the extent that there is any evidence, pertain to those associated
 with the medical condition (e.g., rates of multiple sclerosis and stroke vary around the world
 based on dietary factors, genetic factors, and other environmental factors).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Gender differences pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus
 erythematosus is more common in females; stroke is somewhat more common in middle-age
 males compared with females).
 Diagnostic Markers
 Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in
Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
 Symptoms of catatonia and acute anxiety.
 Medication-induced depressive or manic symptoms.
 blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated
 with manic or depressive syndromes; laboratory tests confirming the diagnosis of multiple
 sclerosis).
 Functional Consequences of Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to
 Another Medical Condition
 Functional consequences of the bipolar symptoms may exacerbate impairments associated with
 the medical condition and may incur worse outcomes because of interference with medical
 treatment.
 Differential Diagnosis
 A separate diagnosis of bipolar and related
 disorder due to another medical condition is not given if the mood disturbance occurs exclusively
 during the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to
 another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild
 neurocognitive disorder if the mood disturbance is judged to be a physiological consequence of
 the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder and if symptoms of irritability or
 elevated mood are a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
 168
 It is important to differentiate symptoms of mania from
 excited catatonic symptoms and from agitation related to acute anxiety states.
 An important differential diagnostic observation
 is that the other medical condition may be treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha
interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment
 using all of the evidence in hand is the best way to try to separate the most likely and/or the most
 important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with the medical condition vs. a
 substance/medication-induced syndrome). The differential diagnosis of the associated medical
 conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
 Comorbidity
 Conditions comorbid with bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
 those associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. Delirium can occur before
 or along with manic symptoms in individuals with Cushing’s disease.