Bipolar II Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for
 a current or past hypomanic episode and the following criteria for a current or past
 major depressive episode:
 Hypomanic Episode
 A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
 mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
 least 4 consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
 B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three
 (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only
 irritable), represent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been
 present to a significant degree:
 1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
 2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
 3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
 4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
151
 5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
 external stimuli), as reported or observed.
 6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
 sexually) or psychomotor agitation.
 7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful
 consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual
 indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
 C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is
 uncharacteristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
 D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by
 others.
 E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or
 occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic
 features, the episode is, by definition, manic.
 F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
 drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition.
 Note: A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment
 (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal
 level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
 hypomanic episode diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two
 symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation following
 antidepressant use) are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic
 episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bipolar diathesis.
 Major Depressive Episode
 A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2
week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of
 the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
 Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical
 condition.
 1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either
 subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by
 others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be
 irritable mood.)
 2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
 the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or
 observation).
 3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of
 more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite
 nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight
gain.)
 4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
 5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others,
 not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
 6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
 7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be
 delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being
 sick).
 8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day
 (either by subjective account or as observed by others).
 9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation
 without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
 suicide.
 B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
 another medical condition.
 Note: Criteria A–C constitute a major depressive episode.
 152
 Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from
 a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of
 intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss
 noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such
 symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the
 presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal response to a
 significant loss should be carefully considered. This decision inevitably requires the
 exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history and the cultural norms
 for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1
 Bipolar II Disorder
 A. Criteria have been met for at least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under
 “Hypomanic Episode” above) and at least one major depressive episode (Criteria
 A–C under “Major Depressive Episode” above).
 B. There has never been a manic episode.
 C. At least one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode are
 not better explained by schizoaffective disorder and are not superimposed on
 schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified
 or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
 D. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent
 alternation between periods of depression and hypomania causes clinically
 significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
 Coding and Recording Procedures
 Bipolar II disorder has one diagnostic code: F31.81. Its status with respect to current
 severity, presence of psychotic features, course, and other specifiers cannot be
 coded but should be indicated in writing (e.g., F31.81 bipolar II disorder, current
 episode depressed, moderate severity, with mixed features; F31.81 bipolar II
 disorder, most recent episode depressed, in partial remission).
 Specify current or most recent episode:
 Hypomanic
 Depressed
 If current episode is hypomanic (or most recent episode if bipolar II disorder is in
 partial or full remission):
 153
 In recording the diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar II
 disorder, current or most recent episode hypomanic, in partial remission/in full
 remission (p. 175) (if full criteria for a hypomanic episode are not currently met),
 plus any of the following hypomanic episode specifiers that are applicable. Note:
 The specifiers “with rapid cycling” and “with seasonal pattern” describe the
 pattern of mood episodes.
 Specify if:
 With anxious distress (p. 169–170)
 With mixed features (pp. 170–171)
 With rapid cycling (p. 171)
 With peripartum onset (pp. 173–174)
 With seasonal pattern (pp. 174–175)
 If current episode is depressed (or most recent episode if bipolar II disorder is in
 partial or full remission):
 In recording the diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar II
 disorder, current or most recent episode depressed, mild/moderate/severe (if full
 criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met), in partial remission/in
 full remission (if full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met)
 (p. 175), plus any of the following major depressive episode specifiers that are
 applicable. Note: The specifiers “with rapid cycling” and “with seasonal pattern”
 describe the pattern of mood episodes.
 Specify if:
 With anxious distress (pp. 169–170)
 With mixed features (pp. 170–171)
 With rapid cycling (p. 171)
 With melancholic features (pp. 171–172)
With atypical features (pp. 172–173)
 With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 173)
 With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 173)
 With catatonia (p. 173). Coding note: Use additional code F06.1.
 With peripartum onset (pp. 172–174)
 With seasonal pattern (pp. 174–175)
 Specify course if full criteria for a mood episode are not currently met:
 In partial remission (p. 175)
 In full remission (p. 175)
 Specify severity if full criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met:
 Mild (p. 175)
 Moderate (p. 175)
 Severe (p. 175)
 Diagnostic Features
 Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes consisting of
 one or more major depressive episodes (Criteria A–C under “Major Depressive Episode”) and at
 least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under “Hypomanic Episode”). A diagnosis of a major
 depressive episode requires that there be a period of depressed mood, or as an alternative,
 marked diminished interest or pleasure, for most of the day nearly every day, lasting for a
 minimum of 2 weeks. The depressed mood or loss of interest must be accompanied by additional
 symptoms occurring nearly every day (e.g., sleep disturbance, psychomotor agitation or
 retardation) for a total of at least five symptoms. The diagnosis of a hypomanic episode requires
 that there be a distinct period of
 154
 abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and
 persistently increased activity or energy for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 4
 consecutive days accompanied by three (or four if mood is only irritable) additional symptoms
 (e.g., inflated self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility) that persist and represent a
 noticeable change from usual behavior and functioning. By definition, psychotic symptoms do
 not occur in hypomanic episodes, and they appear to be less frequent in the major depressive
 episodes in bipolar II disorder than in those of bipolar I disorder. The presence of a manic
 episode during the course of illness precludes the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder (Criterion B
 under “Bipolar II Disorder”). Moreover, for depressive and hypomanic episodes to count toward
 the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, at least one of the depressive episodes and at least one of the
 hypomanic episodes must not be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (i.e.,
 medication, drug of abuse, or toxin exposure) or another medical condition. Note that hypomanic
 episodes that emerge during antidepressant treatment and persist for at least 4 days at a fully
 syndromal level beyond the physiological effects of the treatment are not considered to be
substance-induced and do count toward the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. In addition, at least
 one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode are not explained by a
 diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder and are not superimposed on schizophrenia,
 schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia
 spectrum or other psychotic disorder (Criterion C under “Bipolar II Disorder”). The depressive
 episodes or the pattern of unpredictable mood changes must cause clinically significant distress
 or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion D under
 “Bipolar II Disorder”). The recurrent major depressive episodes are often more frequent and
 lengthier than those occurring in bipolar I disorder.
 Individuals with bipolar II disorder typically present to a clinician during a major depressive
 episode. They are unlikely to complain initially of hypomania, because either they do not
 recognize the symptoms of hypomania or they consider hypomania desirable. Hypomanic
 episodes by definition do not cause significant impairment. Instead, the impairment results from
 the major depressive episodes or from a persistent pattern of unpredictable mood changes and
 fluctuating, unreliable interpersonal or occupational functioning. Individuals with bipolar II
 disorder may not view the hypomanic episodes as pathological or disadvantageous, although
 others may be troubled by the individual’s erratic behavior. Clinical information from other
 informants, such as close friends or relatives, is often useful in establishing the diagnosis of
 bipolar II disorder.
 A hypomanic episode should not be confused with the several days of euthymia and restored
 energy or activity that may follow remission of a major depressive episode. Despite the
 substantial differences in duration and severity between a manic and hypomanic episode, bipolar
 II disorder is not a “milder form” of bipolar I disorder. Compared to individuals with bipolar I
 disorder, individuals with bipolar II disorder have greater chronicity of illness and spend, on
 average, more time in the depressive phase of their illness, which can be severe and/or disabling.
 Although the diagnostic requirements for major depressive episodes are identical whether
 they occur in the context of bipolar II disorder or major depressive disorder, certain clinical
 features of the episodes may hint at possible differential diagnosis. For instance, the coexistence
 of both insomnia and hypersomnia is not uncommon in major depressive episodes in both bipolar
 II disorder and major depressive disorder; however, both insomnia and hypersomnia are
 overrepresented among women with bipolar II disorder. Similarly, atypical depressive symptoms
 (hypersomnia, hyperphagia) are common in both disorders, but more so in those with bipolar II
 disorder.
 Depressive symptoms co-occurring with a hypomanic episode or hypomanic symptoms co
occurring with a depressive episode are common in individuals with bipolar II disorder and are
 overrepresented in females, particularly hypomania with mixed features.
 155
 Individuals experiencing hypomania with mixed features may not label their symptoms as
 hypomania, but instead experience them as depression with increased energy or irritability.
 Associated Features
 A common feature of bipolar II disorder is impulsivity, which can contribute to suicide attempts
and substance use disorders.
 There may be heightened levels of creativity during hypomanic episodes in some individuals
 with a bipolar II disorder. However, that relationship may be nonlinear; that is, greater lifetime
 creative accomplishments have been associated with milder forms of bipolar disorder, and higher
 creativity has been found in unaffected family members. The individual’s attachment to the
 prospect of heightened creativity during hypomanic episodes may contribute to ambivalence
 about seeking treatment or undermine adherence to treatment.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of bipolar II disorder in the United States is 0.8%. The 12-month
 prevalence internationally is 0.3%. The prevalence rate of pediatric bipolar II disorder is difficult
 to establish. DSM-IV bipolar I, bipolar II, and bipolar disorder not otherwise specified yield a
 combined prevalence rate of 1.8% in U.S. and non-U.S. community samples, with higher rates
 (2.7% inclusive) in youth age 12 years or older.
 Development and Course
 Although bipolar II disorder can begin in late adolescence and throughout adulthood, average
 age at onset is the mid-20s, which is slightly later than for bipolar I disorder but earlier than for
 major depressive disorder. Age at onset does not reliably distinguish between bipolar I and II
 disorder. The illness most often begins with a depressive episode and is not recognized as bipolar
 II disorder until a hypomanic episode occurs; this happens in about 12% of individuals with the
 initial diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Anxiety, substance use, or eating disorders may
 also precede the diagnosis, complicating its detection. Many individuals experience several
 episodes of major depression prior to the first recognized hypomanic episode, with typically a
 more than 10-year lag between illness onset and the diagnosis of a bipolar disorder.
 Bipolar II disorder is a highly recurrent disorder, with over 50% of individuals experiencing
 a new episode within a year after their first episode. Individuals with bipolar II disorder also
 have more seasonal variation in mood compared to those with bipolar I disorder.
 The number of lifetime episodes (both hypomanic and major depressive episodes) tends to be
 higher for bipolar II disorder than for major depressive disorder or bipolar I disorder. However,
 individuals with bipolar I disorder are actually more likely to experience hypomanic symptoms
 than are individuals with bipolar II disorder. The interval between mood episodes in the course
 of bipolar II disorder tends to decrease as the individual ages. While the hypomanic episode is
 the feature that defines bipolar II disorder, depressive episodes are more enduring and disabling
 over time. Despite the predominance of depression, once a hypomanic episode has occurred, the
 diagnosis becomes bipolar II disorder and never reverts to major depressive disorder.
 Approximately 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have multiple (four or more)
 mood episodes (hypomanic or major depressive) within the previous 12 months. If this pattern is
 present, it is noted by the specifier “with rapid cycling.” Rapid cycling is more common in
 women and may reflect an overall worsening of the bipolar disorder.
 Switching from a depressive episode to a manic or hypomanic episode (with or without
 mixed features) may occur, both spontaneously and during treatment for depression.
 156
About 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder will ultimately develop a manic
 episode, which changes the diagnosis to bipolar I disorder, regardless of subsequent course.
 Making the diagnosis in children is often a challenge, especially in those with irritability and
 hyperarousal that is nonepisodic (i.e., lacks the well-demarcated periods of altered mood).
 Nonepisodic irritability in youth is associated with an elevated risk for anxiety disorders and
 major depressive disorder, but not bipolar disorder, in adulthood. Persistently irritable youth
 have lower familial rates of bipolar disorder than do youth who have bipolar disorder. For a
 hypomanic episode to be diagnosed, the child’s symptoms must exceed what is expected in a
 given environment and culture for the child’s developmental stage. Similar to adults, youth with
 bipolar II disorder spend less time hypomanic compared to those with bipolar I disorder, and the
 initial presenting episode is typically depression. Compared with adult onset of bipolar II
 disorder, childhood or adolescent onset of the disorder may be associated with a more severe
 lifetime course.
 The 3-year incidence rate of first-onset bipolar II disorder in adults older than 60 years is
 0.34%. However, distinguishing individuals older than 60 years with bipolar II disorder by late
 versus early age at onset does not appear to have any clinical utility. The presence of co
occurring hypomanic symptoms during a depressive episode is more common during bipolar II
 depressive episodes relative to depressive episodes occurring in the context of major depression
 and may help distinguish older individuals with bipolar II disorder from those with major
 depressive disorder. In any later life presentation of bipolar disorder, it is important to consider
 medical factors, including possible medical and neurological causes of new symptoms.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 The risk of bipolar II disorder tends to be highest among relatives of
 individuals with bipolar II disorder, as opposed to individuals with bipolar I disorder or major
 depressive disorder. About a third of individuals with bipolar II disorder reported a family
 history of bipolar disorder. There may be genetic factors influencing the age at onset for bipolar
 disorders. Th ere is also evidence that bipolar II disorder may have a genetic architecture that is
 at least partially distinct from bipolar I disorder and from schizophrenia.
 Course modifiers.
 A rapid-cycling pattern is associated with a poorer prognosis. Return to
 previous level of social function for individuals with bipolar II disorder is more likely for
 individuals of younger age and with less severe depression, suggesting adverse effects of
 prolonged illness on recovery. More education, fewer years of illness, and being married are
 independently associated with functional recovery in individuals with bipolar disorder, even after
 diagnostic type (I vs. II), current depressive symptoms, and presence of psychiatric comorbidity
 are taken into account.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Whereas the gender ratio for bipolar I disorder is equal, findings on gender differences in bipolar
 II disorder are mixed, differing by type of sample (i.e., registry, community, or clinical) and
 country of origin. There is little to no evidence of bipolar gender differences in the general
 population, whereas some, but not all, clinical samples suggest that bipolar II disorder is more
 common in women than in men, which may reflect gender differences in treatment seeking or
 other factors.
Patterns of illness and comorbidity, however, seem to differ by sex, with females being more
 likely than males to report hypomania with mixed depressive features and a rapid-cycling course.
 Childbirth may also be a specific trigger for a hypomanic episode, which can occur in 10%–20%
 of females in nonclinical populations and most typically in the early postpartum period.
 Distinguishing hypomania from the elated mood and reduced sleep
 157
 that normally accompany the birth of a child may be challenging. Postpartum hypomania
 may foreshadow the onset of a depression that occurs in about half of females who experience
 postpartum “highs.” The perimenopause transition can also be a time of mood instability in
 bipolar II disorder. No major sex differences have been found in several clinical variables,
 including rates of depressive episodes, age at and polarity of onset, symptoms, and severity of
 the illness.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 Approximately one-third of individuals with bipolar II disorder report a lifetime history of
 suicide attempt. The risk and incidence of attempted suicide in bipolar II and bipolar I disorder
 appear to be similar. Overall there appears to be about equal rates of suicide attempts and suicide
 deaths across individuals with bipolar II and bipolar I disorder, although overall the rates for both
 attempts and deaths are significantly higher than in the general population. Time spent in a
 depressive episode is associated more significantly with the diagnosis of bipolar I or bipolar II in
 terms of suicide attempt risk. However, the lethality of attempts, as defined by a lower ratio of
 attempts to suicide deaths, may be higher in individuals with bipolar II disorder compared to
 individuals with bipolar I disorder. There may be an association between genetic markers and
 increased risk for suicidal behavior in individuals with bipolar disorder, including a 6.5-fold
 higher risk of suicide among first-degree relatives of bipolar II probands compared with first
degree relatives of bipolar I probands.
 Functional Consequences of Bipolar II Disorder
 Although many individuals with bipolar II disorder return to a fully functional level between
 mood episodes, at least 15% continue to have some interepisode dysfunction, and 20% transition
 directly into another mood episode without interepisode recovery. Functional recovery lags
 substantially behind recovery from symptoms of bipolar II disorder, especially in regard to
 occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent levels of
 education with the general population. Individuals with bipolar II disorder perform more poorly
 than healthy individuals on cognitive tests. Cognitive impairments associated with bipolar II
 disorder may contribute to vocational difficulties. Prolonged unemployment in individuals with
 bipolar disorder is associated with more episodes of depression, older age, increased rates of
 current panic disorder, and lifetime history of alcohol use disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 Major depressive disorder is characterized by the absence of both
 manic episodes and hypomanic episodes. Given that the presence of some manic or hypomanic
symptoms (e.g., fewer symptoms or shorter duration than required for hypomania) may still be
 compatible with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, it is important to ascertain whether the
 symptoms meet criteria for a hypomanic episode to determine whether it is more appropriate to
 make the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. Depressive episodes dominate the overall course of
 illness for most individuals with bipolar II disorder, contributing to the decade-long lag between
 illness onset and the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. Because the diagnostic criteria for major
 depressive episode are identical in major depressive disorder and bipolar II disorder, the
 diagnosis of bipolar II disorder can be made only by eliciting information about at least one prior
 hypomanic episode in order to distinguish the bipolar II disorder from major depressive disorder.
 Cyclothymic disorder.
 In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous periods of hypomanic
 symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a hypomanic episode and numerous
 periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a major
 depressive episode. Bipolar II disorder is distinguished from cyclothymic disorder by the
 presence of one or more hypomanic episodes and one or more major depressive episodes.
 158
 Schizophrenia.
 Schizophrenia is characterized by active-phase psychotic symptoms that may be
 accompanied by major depressive episodes. The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made if no major
 depressive episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms. If they have
 occurred concurrently, the diagnosis of schizophrenia is made if the major depressive episodes
 have been present for only a minority of the time. The diagnosis is bipolar II disorder, with
 psychotic features, if the psychotic symptoms have occurred exclusively during major depressive
 episodes.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by periods in which depressive
 symptoms are concurrent with the active-phase symptoms of schizophrenia and periods in which
 delusions or hallucinations occur for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major depressive
 episode. The diagnosis is bipolar II disorder, with psychotic features, if the psychotic symptoms
 have occurred exclusively during major depressive episodes.
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of bipolar and related
 disorder due to another medical condition should be made instead of bipolar II disorder if the
 hypomanic episodes are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination,
 to be the direct physiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s disease,
 multiple sclerosis).
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced bipolar
 and related disorder is distinguished from bipolar II disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
 stimulants, phencyclidine) or medication (e.g., steroids) is judged to be etiologically related to
 the hypomanic and major depressive episodes. Because individuals with a hypomanic episode
 have a tendency to overuse substances during an episode, it is important to determine whether
 the substance use is a consequence of a primary hypomanic episode or whether the hypomanic
like episode has been caused by the substance use. In some cases, a definitive diagnosis may
 involve establishing that the hypomanic symptoms or depressive symptoms remain once the
 individual is no longer using the substance. Note that hypomanic episodes emerging in the
 context of treatment with an antidepressant medication but persisting at a fully syndromal level
beyond the physiological effect of the medication warrant a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder
 rather than substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be
 misdiagnosed as bipolar II disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms of
 ADHD, such as excessive talking, distractibility, and less need for sleep, overlap with the
 symptoms of hypomania. The double counting of symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar II
 disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether the symptoms represent a distinct
 episode and if the noticeable increase over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar II
 disorder is present.
 Personality disorders.
 The same convention as applies for ADHD also applies when evaluating an
 individual for a personality disorder such as borderline personality disorder because mood
 lability and impulsivity are common in both personality disorders and bipolar II disorder.
 Symptoms must represent a distinct episode, and the noticeable increase over baseline required
 for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder must be present. A diagnosis of a personality disorder
 should not be made during an untreated mood episode unless the lifetime history supports the
 presence of a personality disorder.
 Other bipolar disorders.
 Diagnosis of bipolar II disorder should be differentiated from bipolar I
 disorder by carefully considering whether there have been any past episodes of mania and from
 other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders by confirming the presence of fully
 syndromal hypomania and depression.
 159
 Comorbidity
 Bipolar II disorder is more often than not associated with one or more co-occurring mental
 disorders, with anxiety disorders being the most common. Approximately 60% of individuals
 with bipolar II disorder have three or more co-occurring mental disorders; 75% have an anxiety
 disorder, most commonly social anxiety (38%), specific phobia (36%), and generalized anxiety
 (30%). Lifetime prevalence of comorbid anxiety disorder does not differ between bipolar I and
 bipolar II disorders but is associated with a worse course of illness. Children and adolescents
 with bipolar II disorder have a higher rate of co-occurring anxiety disorders compared to those
 with bipolar I disorder, and the anxiety disorder most often predates the bipolar disorder.
 Anxiety and substance use disorders occur in individuals with bipolar II disorder at a higher
 rate than in the general population. It should be noted that co-occurring anxiety and substance
 use disorder do not seem to follow a course of illness that is truly independent from that of
 bipolar II disorder, but rather have strong associations with mood states. For example, anxiety
 disorders tend to associate most with depressive symptoms, and substance use disorders are
 moderately associated with hypomanic symptoms.
 The prevalence of substance use disorders appears to be similar between bipolar I and bipolar
 II disorders, most commonly alcohol use (42%) and cannabis use (20%) disorders. Sociocultural
 factors influence the pattern of comorbid conditions in bipolar II disorder. For example,
 countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may have a lower
 prevalence of substance use comorbidity.
 Individuals with bipolar II disorder appear to have lower rates of comorbid posttraumatic
F34.0
 stress disorder compared to individuals with bipolar I disorder.
 Approximately 14% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have at least one lifetime eating
 disorder, with binge-eating disorder being more common than bulimia nervosa and anorexia
 nervosa.
 Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder are common in women with
 bipolar disorder, especially in those with bipolar II disorder. Among women who have
 premenstrual syndrome and/or premenstrual dysphoric disorder, bipolar mood symptoms and
 lability may be more severe.
 Individuals with bipolar II disorder also have comorbid medical conditions, which have the
 potential to substantially complicate course and prognosis. These include cardiovascular disease,
 migraine, and autoimmune disorders.