 Bipolar I Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
For a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for
 a manic episode. The manic episode may have been preceded by and may be
 followed by hypomanic or major depressive episodes.
 140
 Manic Episode
 A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
 mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
 least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if
 hospitalization is necessary).
 B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or
 more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) are present to
 a significant degree and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior:
 1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
 2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
 3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
 4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
 5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
 external stimuli), as reported or observed.
 6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
 sexually) or psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless non-goal-directed
 activity).
 7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful
 consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual
 indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
 C. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in
 social or occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent
 harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
 D. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
 drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition.
 Note: A full manic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
 medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level
 beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
 manic episode and, therefore, a bipolar I diagnosis.
 Note: Criteria A–D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime manic episode is
 required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
 Hypomanic Episode
 A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
 mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
 least 4 consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three
 (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) have
 persisted, represent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been
 present to a significant degree:
 1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
 2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
 3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
 4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
 5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
 external stimuli), as reported or observed.
 6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
 sexually) or psychomotor agitation.
 7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful
 consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual
 indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
 141
 C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is
 uncharacteristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
 D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by
 others.
 E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or
 occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic
 features, the episode is, by definition, manic.
 F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
 drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition.
 Note: A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment
 (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal
 level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
 hypomanic episode diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two
 symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation following
 antidepressant use) are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic
 episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bipolar diathesis.
 Note: Criteria A–F constitute a hypomanic episode. Hypomanic episodes are
 common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I
 disorder.
 Major Depressive Episode
 A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2
week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of
 the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical
 condition.
 1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either
 subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by
 others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be
 irritable mood.)
 2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
 the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or
 observation).
 3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of
 more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite
 nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight
 gain.)
 4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
 5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others,
 not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
 6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
 7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be
 delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being
 sick).
 8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day
 (either by subjective account or as observed by others).
 9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation
 without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
 suicide.
 B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
 another medical condition.
 Note: Criteria A–C constitute a major depressive episode. Major depressive
 episodes are common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of
 bipolar I disorder.
 142
 Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from
 a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of
 intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss
 noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such
 symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the
 presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal response to a
 significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision inevitably requires
the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history and the cultural
 norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1
 Bipolar I Disorder
 A. Criteria have been met for at least one manic episode (Criteria A–D under
 “Manic Episode” above).
 B. At least one manic episode is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder
 and is not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder,
 delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum
 and other psychotic disorder.
 Coding and Recording Procedures
 The diagnostic code for bipolar I disorder is based on type of current or most recent
 episode and its status with respect to current severity, presence of psychotic
 features, and remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only
 indicated if full criteria are currently met for a manic or major depressive episode.
 Remission specifiers are only indicated if the full criteria are not currently met for a
 manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode. Codes are as follows:
 Bipolar I disorder
 Current or
 most
 recent
 episode
 manic
 Current or
 most recent
 episode
 hypomanic*
 Current or
 most
 recent
 episode
 depressed
 Current or
 most recent
 episode
 unspecified**
 Mild (p. 175) F31.11 NA F31.31 NA
 Moderate (p. 175) F31.12 NA F31.32 NA
 Severe (p. 175) F31.13 NA F31.4 NA
 143
 With psychotic features*** (p. 173)
 F31.2 NA F31.5 NA
 In partial remission (p. 175) F31.73 F31.71 F31.75 NA
 In full remission (p. 175) F31.74 F31.72 F31.76 NA
 Unspecified F31.9 F31.9 F31.9 NA
 *Severity and psychotic specifiers do not apply; code F31.0 for cases not in remission.
 **Severity, psychotic, and remission specifiers do not apply. Code F31.9.
 ***If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of episode severity.
 In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order:
 bipolar I disorder, type of current episode (or most recent episode if bipolar I
 disorder is in partial or full remission), severity/psychotic/remission specifiers,
 followed by as many of the following specifiers without codes as apply to the
 current episode (or the most recent episode if bipolar I disorder is in partial or full
 remission). Note: The specifiers “with rapid cycling” and “with seasonal pattern”
 describe the pattern of mood episodes.
Specify if:
 With anxious distress (pp. 169–170)
 With mixed features (pp. 170–171)
 With rapid cycling (p. 171)
 With melancholic features (pp. 171–172)
 With atypical features (pp. 172–173)
 With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 173; applies to manic episode
 and/or major depressive episode)
 With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 173; applies to manic episode
 and/or major depressive episode)
 With catatonia (p. 173). Coding note: Use additional code F06.1.
 With peripartum onset (pp. 173–174)
 With seasonal pattern (pp. 174–175)
 Diagnostic Features
 Bipolar I disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes (manic,
 depressive, and hypomanic), but the occurrence of at least one manic episode is necessary for the
 diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. The essential feature of a manic episode is a distinct period
 during which there is an abnormally, persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and
 persistently increased activity or energy that is present for most of the day, nearly every day, for
 a period of at least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary), accompanied by at
 least three additional symptoms from Criterion B. If the mood is irritable rather than elevated or
 expansive, at least four Criterion B symptoms must be present.
 Mood in a manic episode is often described as euphoric, excessively cheerful, high, or
 “feeling on top of the world.” In some cases, the mood is of such a highly infectious quality that
 it is easily recognized as excessive and may be characterized by unlimited and
 144
 haphazard enthusiasm for interpersonal, sexual, or occupational interactions. For example,
 the individual may spontaneously start extensive conversations with strangers in public. Often
 the predominant mood is irritable rather than elevated, particularly when the individual’s wishes
 are denied or if the individual has been using substances. Rapid shifts in mood over brief periods
 of time may occur and are referred to as lability (i.e., the alternation among euphoria, dysphoria,
 and irritability). In children, happiness, silliness, and “goofiness” are normal in many social
 contexts; however, if these symptoms are recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond
 what is expected for the developmental level of the child, they may meet the Criterion A mood
 requirement of abnormally elevated mood. For the happiness or silliness of a child to meet
 Criterion A, it must be distinctly increased from the child’s baseline and accompanied by
 persistently increased activity or energy levels that to those who know the child well are clearly
 unusual for that child. For a child’s symptoms to meet criteria for a manic episode, the symptoms
must also meet Criterion B for mania and must also represent a change from the child’s usual
 baseline.
 During the manic episode, the individual may engage in multiple overlapping new projects.
 The projects are often initiated with little knowledge of the topic, and nothing seems out of the
 individual’s reach. The increased activity or energy levels may manifest at unusual hours of the
 day, such as during the individual’s normal sleep phase.
 Inflated self-esteem is typically present, ranging from uncritical self-confidence to marked
 grandiosity, and may reach delusional proportions (Criterion B1). Despite lack of any particular
 experience or talent, the individual may embark on complex tasks such as writing a novel or
 seeking publicity for some impractical invention. Grandiose delusions (e.g., of having a special
 relationship to a famous person) are common. In children, overestimation of abilities and belief
 that, for example, they are the best at a sport or the smartest in the class is normal; however,
 when such beliefs are present despite clear evidence to the contrary or the child attempts feats
 that are clearly dangerous and, most important, represent a change from the child’s normal
 behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied.
 One of the most common features is a decreased need for sleep (Criterion B2), which is
 distinct from insomnia (during which the individual wants to sleep or feels the need to sleep but
 is unable to). The individual may sleep little, if at all, or may awaken several hours earlier than
 usual, feeling rested and full of energy. When the sleep disturbance is severe, the individual may
 go for days without sleep, yet not feel tired. Often decreased need for sleep heralds the onset of a
 manic episode.
 Speech can be rapid, pressured, loud, and difficult to interrupt (Criterion B3). Individuals
 may talk continuously and without regard for others’ wishes to communicate, often in an
 intrusive manner or without concern for the relevance of what is said. Speech is sometimes
 characterized by jokes, puns, amusing irrelevancies, and theatricality, with dramatic mannerisms,
 singing, and excessive gesturing. Loudness and forcefulness of speech often become more
 important than what is conveyed. If the individual’s mood is more irritable than expansive,
 speech may be marked by complaints, hostile comments, or angry tirades, particularly if attempts
 are made to interrupt the individual. Both Criterion A and Criterion B symptoms may be
 accompanied by symptoms of the opposite (i.e., depressive) pole (see “with mixed features”
 specifier, pp. 170–171).
 Often the individual’s thoughts race at a rate faster than can be expressed through speech
 (Criterion B4). Frequently there is flight of ideas evidenced by a nearly continuous flow of
 accelerated speech, with abrupt shifts from one topic to another. When flight of ideas is severe,
 speech may become disorganized, incoherent, and particularly distressing to the individual.
 Sometimes thoughts are experienced as so crowded that it is very difficult to speak.
 Distractibility (Criterion B5) is evidenced by an inability to censor immaterial external
 stimuli (e.g., the interviewer’s attire, background noises or conversations, furnishings in the
 room) and often prevents individuals experiencing mania from holding a rational conversation or
 attending to instructions.
 145
 The increase in goal-directed activity (Criterion B6) often consists of excessive planning and
 participation in multiple activities, including sexual, occupational, political, or religious
activities. Increased sexual drive, fantasies, and behavior are often present. Individuals in a
 manic episode usually show increased sociability (e.g., renewing old acquaintances or calling or
 contacting friends or even strangers), without regard to the intrusive, domineering, and
 demanding nature of these interactions. They often also display psychomotor agitation or
 restlessness (i.e., purposeless activity) by pacing or by holding multiple conversations
 simultaneously. Some individuals write excessive letters, e-mails, text messages, and so forth, on
 many different topics to friends, public figures, or the media.
 The increased activity criterion can be difficult to ascertain in children; however, when the
 child takes on many tasks simultaneously, starts devising elaborate and unrealistic plans for
 projects, develops previously absent and developmentally inappropriate sexual preoccupations
 (not accounted for by sexual abuse or exposure to sexually explicit material), then Criterion B
 might be met based on clinical judgment. It is essential to determine whether the behavior
 represents a change from the child’s baseline behavior; occurs most of the day, nearly every day
 for the requisite time period; and occurs in temporal association with other symptoms of mania.
 The expansive mood, excessive optimism, grandiosity, and poor judgment often lead to
 reckless involvement in activities such as spending sprees, giving away possessions, reckless
 driving, foolish business investments, and sexual indiscretions that are unusual for the individual,
 even though these activities are likely to have catastrophic consequences (Criterion B7). The
 individual may purchase many unneeded items without the money to pay for them and, in some
 cases, give them away. Sexual indiscretions may include infidelity or indiscriminate sexual
 encounters with strangers, often disregarding the risk of sexually transmitted diseases or
 interpersonal consequences.
 The manic episode must result in marked impairment in social or occupational functioning
 (e.g., financial losses, loss of employment, school failure, divorce) or require hospitalization to
 prevent harm to self or others (e.g., physical exhaustion or hyperthermia from manic excitement,
 self-injurious behavior). By definition, the presence of psychotic features during a manic episode
 also satisfies Criterion C.
 Manic symptoms or syndromes that are attributable to the direct physiological effects of a
 drug of abuse (e.g., in the context of cocaine or amphetamine intoxication), the side effects of
 medications or treatments (e.g., steroids, L-dopa, antidepressants, stimulants), or another medical
 condition do not count toward the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. However, a fully syndromal
 manic episode that arises during treatment (e.g., with medications, electroconvulsive therapy,
 light therapy) and persists beyond the physiological effect of the inducing agent (e.g., after a
 medication is fully out of the individual’s system or the effects of electroconvulsive therapy
 would be expected to have dissipated completely) is sufficient evidence for a manic episode that
 is considered due to bipolar I disorder (Criterion D). Caution is indicated so that one or two
 symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use)
 are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a manic or hypomanic episode, nor necessarily an
 indication of a bipolar disorder diathesis. Although not essential to a diagnosis of bipolar I
 disorder, hypomanic or depressive episodes often precede or follow a manic episode. Full
 descriptions of the diagnostic features of a hypomanic episode may be found within the text for
 bipolar II disorder, and the features of a major depressive episode are described within the text
 for major depressive disorder.
Associated Features
 During a manic episode, individuals often do not perceive that they are ill or in need of treatment
 and vehemently resist efforts to be treated. Individuals may change their dress, makeup, or
 personal appearance to a more sexually suggestive or flamboyant style. Some perceive a sharper
 sense of smell, hearing, or vision. Gambling and antisocial behaviors
 146
 may accompany the manic episode. Mood may shift very rapidly to anger or depression; some
 individuals may become hostile and physically threatening to others and, when delusional,
 become physically assaultive or suicidal. Serious consequences of a manic episode (e.g.,
 involuntary hospitalization, difficulties with the law, serious financial difficulties) often result
 from poor judgment, loss of insight, and hyperactivity. Depressive symptoms occur in some 35%
 of manic episodes (see “with mixed features” specifier, p. 170), and mixed features are
 associated with poorer outcome and increased suicide attempts. Bipolar I disorder is also
 associated with significant decrements in quality of life and well-being.
 Trait-like features associated with the diagnosis include hyperthymic, depressive,
 cyclothymic, anxious, and irritable temperaments, sleep and circadian rhythm disturbances,
 reward sensitivity, and creativity. Having a first-degree relative with bipolar disorder increases
 the risk of diagnosis approximately 10-fold.
 Prevalence
 The 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 bipolar I disorder in a nationally representative U.S. adult
 sample was 1.5% and did not differ between men (1.6%) and women (1.5%). Compared with
 non-Hispanic Whites, prevalence of bipolar I disorder appears to be higher among Native
 Americans and lower among African Americans, Hispanics, and Asians/Pacific Islanders.
 Twelve-month prevalence of DSM-IV bipolar I disorder across 11 countries ranged from 0.0% to
 0.6% and was greater in high-income countries than in low- and middle-income countries, except
 in Japan, where prevalence was low (0.01%). The lifetime prevalence ratio in men to women is
 approximately 1.1:1.
 Development and Course
 The peak age at onset of bipolar I disorder across studies is between 20 and 30 years, but onset
 occurs throughout the life cycle. In the United States, mean age at onset of DSM-5 bipolar I
 disorder is 22 years and slightly younger for women (21.5 years) than for men (23.0 years). In a
 comparison of six international sites, median age at onset of DSM-IV-TR bipolar I disorder was
 24.3 years. Special considerations are necessary to apply the diagnosis in children. Because
 children of the same chronological age may be at different developmental stages, it is difficult to
 define with precision what is “normal” or “expected” at any given point. Therefore, each child
 should be judged according to his or her own baseline in determining whether a particular
 behavior is “normal” or evidence of a manic episode. Although age at first onset may occur in
 the 60s or 70s, onset of manic symptoms (e.g., sexual or social disinhibition) in late mid-life or
 late-life should prompt consideration of medical conditions (e.g., frontotemporal neurocognitive
 disorder) and of substance ingestion or withdrawal.
More than 90% of individuals who have a single manic episode go on to have recurrent mood
 episodes. Approximately 60% of manic episodes occur immediately before a major depressive
 episode. Individuals with bipolar I disorder who have multiple (four or more) mood episodes
 (major depressive, manic, or hypomanic) occurring in the prior 12 months receive the specifier
 “with rapid cycling,” a common variant associated with poorer outcomes. About half of
 individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder exhibit a predominant polarity (relapse tending to be
 either depressive or manic), with one international study of bipolar I disorder finding 31.3% with
 predominant mania, 21.4% with predominant depression, and 47.3% without polarity
 predominance.
 The course of bipolar I disorder is highly heterogeneous. Some patterns have been noted
 across episodes (e.g., a manic episode with psychotic features may be associated with psychotic
 features in subsequent manic episodes). Polarity of first episode tends to be associated with
 predominant polarity of future episodes and clinical features (e.g., depressive onset is associated
 with greater density of depressive episodes and suicidal behavior). The
 147
 presence of mixed features in a manic episode is associated with a poorer prognosis, poorer
 lithium response, and suicidal behavior.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Childhood 
adversity 
(including 
early 
emotional 
trauma, 
parental
 psychopathology, and family conflict) is a known risk factor for bipolar disorder and appears to
 predispose to early onset of bipolar disorder. Childhood adversity is also associated with poorer
 prognosis and a worse clinical picture that may include medical or psychiatric comorbidities,
 suicide, and associated psychotic features. More proximally, recent life stress and other negative
 life events increase depressive relapse risk in individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder,
 whereas manic relapse appears to be specifically linked to goal-attainment life events (e.g.,
 getting married, completing a degree). Cannabis and other substance use is associated with
 exacerbation of manic symptoms among individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder, as well as
 first onset of manic symptoms in the general population. There is some evidence that becoming
 married is less common among individuals with bipolar disorder than in the general population
 and that a diagnosis of bipolar disorder is associated with being previously as opposed to
 currently married.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Genetic processes strongly affect predisposition to bipolar disorder,
 with heritability estimates around 90% in some twin studies. Risk of bipolar disorder in the
 general population is around 1%, while risk in a first-degree relative is 5%–10%. However,
 monozygotic concordance rates are significantly less than 100% (40%–70%), indicating that
 much risk is left unexplained by genes alone. The mechanism of heritability is not Mendelian,
 and involves multiple genes (or more complex genetic mechanisms) of small effect, interacting
 with each other, the environment, and random factors. Emerging genetic findings suggest that
 mania- and depression-proneness are inherited separately, and bipolar disorder shares a genetic
 origin with schizophrenia.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Bipolar I disorder symptoms tend to be consistent across cultural contexts, but some variation
 exists in symptom expression and interpretation. For example, individuals from different cultural
 backgrounds with bipolar I disorder, with psychotic features, may vary in the prevalence of flight
 of ideas or types of delusions (e.g., grandiose, persecutory, sexual, religious, or somatic).
 Cultural factors may affect disorder prevalence. For example, countries with reward-oriented
 cultural values that place significance on individual pursuit of reward have a relatively higher
 prevalence of bipolar disorder. In the United States, individuals with bipolar disorder had an
 earlier age at onset than those in Europe and were more likely to have a family history of
 psychiatric disorder.
 Culture also influences clinician diagnostic practices regarding bipolar disorder. Compared
 with non-Latinx Whites in the United States, African Americans with bipolar I disorder are at
 higher risk of being misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Possible reasons include underrecognition
 of mood symptoms, cultural and linguistic misunderstanding between clinicians and the
 individuals presenting for treatment (e.g., misinterpretation of cultural mistrust as paranoia),
 more florid psychotic symptoms at presentation due to delay in receiving services, and diagnoses
 based on shorter clinical assessments. These factors may result in discriminatory misdiagnosis of
 schizophrenia, particularly in African Americans with mood disorders who present with
 psychotic features.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Women may be more likely to experience rapid cycling and mixed states, and to have patterns of
 comorbidity that differ from those of men, including higher rates of lifetime eating
 148
 disorders. Women with bipolar I or II disorder are more likely to experience depressive
 symptoms than are men. They also have a higher lifetime risk of alcohol use disorder than do
 men and a much greater likelihood of alcohol use disorder than do women in the general
 population.
 Some women with bipolar disorder experience exacerbation of mood symptoms during the
 premenstrual time period, and this has been associated with a worse course of illness. Many
 women with bipolar disorder also report severe emotional disturbances during perimenopause
 when estrogen levels are decreasing. There does not appear to be an increased risk of mood
 episodes in pregnant women with bipolar disorder except in those who discontinue medications
 for pregnancy. In contrast, there is strong and consistent evidence for an increased risk of mood
 episodes (both depression and mania) in women with bipolar I disorder in the postpartum period.
 The specifier “with peripartum onset” should be used for mood episodes that begin during
 pregnancy or within 4 weeks of delivery. “Postpartum psychosis” typically resembles a manic or
 mixed mood episode with psychotic symptoms and is strongly associated with bipolar I disorder.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 The lifetime risk of suicide in individuals with bipolar disorder is estimated to be 20- to 30-fold
 greater than in the general population. An estimated 5%–6% of individuals with bipolar disorders
die by suicide. While suicide attempts are higher in women, lethal suicide is more common in
 men with bipolar disorder. A past history of suicide attempt and percent days spent depressed in
 the past year are associated with greater risk of suicide attempts or completions. Nearly half of
 individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for bipolar disorder have an alcohol use disorder, and
 those with both disorders are at greater risk for suicide attempt and suicide death.
 Functional Consequences of Bipolar I Disorder
 Approximately 30% of individuals with bipolar disorder show severe impairment in work role
 functioning, although many individuals return to a fully functional level between episodes.
 Functional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms, especially with respect
 to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent levels of
 education when compared with the general population. Cognitive impairments persist through
 the lifespan, even during euthymic periods, and may contribute to vocational and interpersonal
 difficulties. Higher level of self-perceived stigma is associated with lower level of functioning.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Major depressive disorder.
 There is a risk of misdiagnosing bipolar I disorder as unipolar
 depression because of the prominence of depression in the presentation of bipolar I disorder: 1)
 the first episode of bipolar disorder is often depressive, 2) depressive symptoms are the most
 frequent symptoms experienced across the long-term course of bipolar I disorder, and 3) the
 problem for which individuals typically seek help is depression. When the individual presents in
 an episode of major depression, it is therefore important to actively probe for a history of mania
 or hypomania. Factors that might indicate that the diagnosis is bipolar I disorder rather than
 major depressive disorder in an individual presenting with a current depressive episode include
 family history of bipolar disorder, onset of illness in early 20s, numerous past episodes, presence
 of psychotic symptoms, and a history of lack of response to antidepressant treatment or the
 emergence of a manic episode during antidepressant treatment (e.g., medication,
 electroconvulsive therapy).
 Other bipolar disorders.
 Bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder, and other specified bipolar and
 related disorder are similar to bipolar I disorder by virtue of their including
 149
 periods of hypomanic symptoms in their presentations but are differentiated from bipolar I
 disorder by the absence of any manic episodes.
 Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, or other anxiety
 disorders.
 A
 careful history of symptoms is needed to differentiate generalized anxiety disorder from bipolar
 disorder, as anxious ruminations may be mistaken for racing thoughts (and vice versa), and
 efforts to minimize anxious feelings may be taken as impulsive behavior. Similarly, symptoms of
 posttraumatic stress disorder need to be differentiated from bipolar disorder. It is helpful to
 assess the episodic nature of the symptoms described (classical bipolar I is episodic), as well as
 to consider symptom triggers, in making this differential diagnosis.
 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
 The diagnosis of bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition should be made instead of bipolar I disorder if the
 manic episodes are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination, to be
 the direct physiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s disease,
 multiple sclerosis).
 Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 A substance/medication-induced bipolar
 and related disorder is distinguished from bipolar I disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
 stimulants, phencyclidine) or medication (e.g., steroids) is judged to be etiologically related to
 the manic episode. Because individuals with a manic episode have a tendency to overuse
 substances during an episode, it is important to determine whether the substance use is a
 consequence of a primary manic episode or whether the manic-like episode has been caused by
 the substance use. In some cases, a definitive diagnosis may involve establishing that the manic
 symptoms remain once the individual is no longer using the substance. Note that manic episodes
 emerging in the context of treatment with an antidepressant medication but that persist at a fully
 syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of the medication warrant a diagnosis of bipolar
 I disorder rather than substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder.
 Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by periods in which manic and
 major depressive episodes are concurrent with the active phase symptoms of schizophrenia and
 periods in which delusions or hallucinations occur for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a manic
 or major depressive episode. The diagnosis is “bipolar I disorder, with psychotic features” if the
 psychotic symptoms have occurred exclusively during manic and major depressive episodes.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by
 persistent symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity, which may resemble the
 symptoms of a manic episode (e.g., distractibility, increased activity, impulsive behavior) and
 have their onset by age 12. In contrast, the symptoms of mania in bipolar I disorder occur in
 distinct episodes and typically begin in late adolescence or early adulthood.
 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
 In individuals with severe irritability, particularly children
 and adolescents, care must be taken to apply the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder only to those who
 have had a clear episode of mania or hypomania—that is, a distinct time period, of the required
 duration, during which the irritability was clearly different from the individual’s baseline and
 was accompanied by the onset of the other characteristic symptoms of mania (e.g., grandiosity,
 decreased need for sleep, pressured speech, involvement in activities with a high potential for
 painful consequences). When a child’s irritability is persistent and particularly severe, the
 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder would be more appropriate. Indeed, when
 any child is being assessed for mania, it is essential that the symptoms represent a clear change
 from the child’s typical behavior.
 150
 Personality disorders.
 Personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder may have
 substantial symptomatic overlap with bipolar I disorder, since mood lability and impulsivity are
 common in both conditions. In order to make a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, symptoms of
 mood lability and impulsivity must represent a distinct episode of illness, or there must be a
 noticeable increase in these symptoms over the individual’s baseline in order to justify an
 additional diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
F31.81
 Comorbidity
 Co-occurring mental disorders are the norm in bipolar I disorder, with the majority of individuals
 having a history of three or more disorders. The most frequently comorbid disorders are anxiety
 disorders, alcohol use disorder, other substance use disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
 disorder. Sociocultural factors influence the pattern of comorbid conditions in bipolar disorder.
 For example, countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may
 have a lower prevalence of substance use comorbidity. Bipolar I disorder is frequently associated
 with borderline, schizotypal, and antisocial personality disorder. In particular, although the
 underlying nature of the relationship between bipolar I disorder and borderline personality
 disorder is unclear, the substantial comorbidity between the two may reflect similarities in
 phenomenology (i.e., misdiagnosing the emotional extremes of borderline personality disorder as
 bipolar I disorder), the influence of borderline personality features on vulnerability to bipolar I
 disorder, and the impact of early childhood adversity on the development of both bipolar I and
 borderline personality disorder.
 Individuals with bipolar I disorder also have high rates of serious co-occurring and often
 untreated medical conditions, which largely explain the shortened life expectancy of those with
 bipolar disorder. Comorbidities appear in multiple organ systems, with cardiovascular and
 autoimmune diseases, obstructive sleep apnea, metabolic syndrome, and migraine more common
 among individuals with bipolar disorder than in the general population. Comorbid
 overweight/obesity is a particular concern for individuals with bipolar disorder and is associated
 with poor treatment outcomes.