Differential Diagnosis
 The diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not given to individuals younger than 18 years
 and is given only if there is evidence of conduct disorder before age 15 years. For individuals
 older than 18 years, a diagnosis of conduct disorder is given only if the criteria for antisocial
 personality disorder are not met.
 Substance use disorders.
 When antisocial behavior in an adult is associated with a substance use
 disorder, the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not made unless the signs of antisocial
 personality disorder were also present in childhood and have continued into adulthood. When
 substance use and antisocial behavior both began in childhood and continued into adulthood,
 both a substance use disorder and antisocial personality disorder should be diagnosed if the
 criteria for both are met, even though some antisocial acts may be a consequence of the
 substance use disorder (e.g., illegal selling of drugs, thefts to obtain money for drugs).
 Schizophrenia and bipolar disorders.
 Other personality disorders.
 Antisocial behavior that occurs exclusively during the course
 of schizophrenia or a bipolar disorder should not be diagnosed as antisocial personality disorder.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with antisocial
 personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore important to
 distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However,
 if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in
 addition to antisocial personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with antisocial
 personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder share a tendency to be tough-minded,
 glib, superficial, exploitative, and lack empathy. However,
 752
 narcissistic personality disorder does not include characteristics of impulsivity, aggression, and
 deceit. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality disorder may not be as needy of the
 admiration and envy of others, and persons with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the
 history of conduct disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. Individuals with
 antisocial personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder share a tendency to be
 impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons
 with histrionic personality disorder tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not
 characteristically engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with histrionic and borderline
 personality disorders are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial
 personality disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification.
 Individuals with antisocial personality disorder tend to be less emotionally unstable and more
 aggressive than those with borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial behavior may be
Criminal behavior not associated with a mental disorder.
 F60.3
 present in some individuals with paranoid personality disorder, it is not usually motivated by a
 desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder, but rather is
 more often attributable to a desire for revenge.
 Antisocial personality disorder must be
 distinguished from antisocial behavior not due to a mental disorder, for example, criminal
 behavior undertaken for gain that is not accompanied by the personality features characteristic of
 this disorder. In these cases, the condition adult antisocial behavior may be coded (see “Other
 Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”). 