Differential Diagnosis
 Depressive and bipolar disorders.
 Borderline personality disorder often co-occurs with depressive
 or bipolar disorders, and when criteria for both are met, both should be diagnosed. Because the
 cross-sectional presentation of borderline personality disorder can be mimicked by an episode of
 depressive or bipolar disorder, the clinician should avoid giving an additional diagnosis of
Separation anxiety disorder in adults.
 borderline personality disorder based only on cross-sectional presentation without having
 documented that the pattern of behavior had an early onset and a long-standing course.
 Separation anxiety disorder and borderline personality
 disorder are characterized by fear of abandonment by loved ones, but problems in identity, self
direction, interpersonal functioning, and impulsivity are additionally central to borderline
 personality disorder.
 Other personality disorders.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with borderline
 personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore important to
 distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However,
 if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in
 addition to borderline personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although histrionic personality
 disorder can also be characterized by attention seeking, manipulative behavior, and rapidly
 shifting emotions, borderline personality disorder is distinguished by self-destructiveness, angry
 disruptions in close relationships, and chronic feelings of deep emptiness and loneliness.
 Paranoid ideas or illusions may be present in both borderline personality disorder and
 schizotypal personality disorder, but these symptoms are more transient, interpersonally reactive,
 and responsive to external structuring in borderline personality disorder. Although paranoid
 personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder may also be characterized by an angry
 reaction to minor stimuli, the relative stability of self-image, as well as the relative lack of
 physical self-destructiveness, repetitive impulsivity, and profound abandonment concerns,
 distinguishes these disorders from borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial
 personality disorder and borderline personality disorder are both characterized by manipulative
 behavior, individuals with antisocial personality disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power,
 or some other material gratification, whereas the goal in borderline personality disorder is
 directed more toward gaining the concern of caretakers. Both dependent personality disorder and
 borderline personality disorder are characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the
 individual with borderline personality disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional
 emptiness, rage, and demands, whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder reacts
 with increasing appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship
 to provide caregiving and support. Borderline personality disorder can
 757
 further be distinguished from dependent personality disorder by the typical pattern of unstable
 and intense relationships.
 Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Borderline personality disorder must be
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 Identity problems.
 Borderline personality disorder must also be distinguished from
 symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
 Borderline personality disorder should be distinguished from an identity
 problem, which is reserved for identity concerns related to a developmental phase (e.g.,
 adolescence) and does not qualify as a mental disorder. Adolescents and young adults with
 identity problems (especially when accompanied by substance use) may transiently display
behaviors that misleadingly give the impression of borderline personality disorder. Such
 situations are characterized by emotional instability, existential dilemmas, uncertainty, anxiety
provoking choices, conflicts about sexual orientation, and competing social pressures to decide
 on careers.