Differential Diagnosis
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 histrionic personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to histrionic personality disorder, all can be diagnosed.
 Although borderline personality disorder can also be characterized by attention seeking,
 manipulative behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions, it is distinguished by self-destructiveness,
 angry disruptions in close relationships, and chronic feelings of deep emptiness and identity
 disturbance. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder
 share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and
 manipulative, but persons with histrionic personality disorder tend to be more exaggerated in
 their emotions and do not characteristically engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with
 histrionic personality disorder are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial
 personality disorder are manipu
 760
 lative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Although individuals with
 narcissistic personality disorder also crave attention from others, they usually want praise for
 their “superiority,” whereas individuals with histrionic personality disorder are willing to be
 viewed as fragile or dependent if this is instrumental in getting attention. Individuals with
 narcissistic personality disorder may exaggerate the intimacy of their relationships with other
 people, but they are more apt to emphasize the “VIP” status or wealth of their friends. In
 dependent personality disorder, the individual is excessively dependent on others for praise and
 guidance, but is without the flamboyant, exaggerated, emotional features of individuals with
 histrionic personality disorder.
 Many individuals may display histrionic personality traits. Only when these traits are
 inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective
 distress do they constitute histrionic personality disorder.
 Personality change due to another medical condition.
 Histrionic personality disorder must be
 distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
 emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
 Substance use disorders.
 The disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that may
 develop in association with persistent substance use.