Differential Diagnosis
 Other personality disorders and personality traits.
 Other personality disorders may be confused with
 narcissistic personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
 important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
 features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
 personality disorders in addition to narcissistic personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. The
 most useful feature in discriminating narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic, antisocial,
 and borderline personality disorders, in which the interactive styles are coquettish, callous, and
 needy, respectively, is the grandiosity characteristic of narcissistic personality disorder. The
 relative stability of self-image and self-control as well as the relative lack of self-destructiveness,
 impulsivity, separation insecurity, and emotional hyperreactivity also help distinguish
 narcissistic personality disorder from borderline personality disorder.
 Excessive pride in achievements, a relative lack of emotional display, and ignorance of or
 disdain for others’ sensitivities help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic
 personality disorder. Although individuals with borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality
 disorders may require much attention, those with narcissistic personality disorder specifically
 need that attention to be admiring. Individuals with antisocial and narcissistic personality
 disorders share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and unempathic.
 However, narcissistic personality disorder does not necessarily include characteristics of
 impulsive aggressivity and deceitfulness. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality
 disorder may be more indifferent and less sensitive to others’ reactions or criticism, and
 individuals with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the history of conduct disorder in
 childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood.
764
 In both narcissistic personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the
 individual may profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do things
 as well. However, while those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder tend to be more
 immersed in perfectionism related to order and rigidity, individuals with narcissistic personality
 disorder tend to set high perfectionistic standards, especially for appearance and performance,
 and to be critically concerned if they are not measuring up.
 Suspiciousness and social withdrawal usually distinguish those with schizotypal, avoidant, or
 paranoid personality disorder from those with narcissistic personality disorder. When these
 qualities are present in individuals with narcissistic personality disorder, they derive primarily
 from shame and fear of failure, or fear of having imperfections or flaws revealed.
 Many highly successful individuals display personality traits that might be considered
 narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause
 significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute narcissistic personality
 disorder.
 Mania or hypomania.
 Grandiosity may emerge as part of manic or hypomanic episodes, but the
 association with mood change or functional impairments helps distinguish these episodes from
 narcissistic personality disorder.
 Substance use disorders.
 Persistent depressive disorder.
 Narcissistic personality disorder must also be distinguished from
 symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
 Experiences that threaten self-esteem can evoke a deep sense of
 inferiority and sustained feelings of shame, envy, self-criticism, and insecurity in individuals
 with narcissistic personality disorder that can result in persistent negative feelings resembling
 those seen in persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are also met for persistent depressive
 disorder, both conditions can be diagnosed. 