Insomnia Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A predominant complaint of dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality,
 associated with one (or more) of the following symptoms:
 1. Difficulty initiating sleep. (In children, this may manifest as difficulty initiating
 sleep without caregiver intervention.)
 2. Difficulty maintaining sleep, characterized by frequent awakenings or
 problems returning to sleep after awakenings. (In children, this may manifest
 as difficulty returning to sleep without caregiver intervention.)
 3. Early-morning awakening with inability to return to sleep.
 B. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
 social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or other important areas
 of functioning.
 C. The sleep difficulty occurs at least 3 nights per week.
 410
 D. The sleep difficulty is present for at least 3 months.
 E. The sleep difficulty occurs despite adequate opportunity for sleep.
 F. The insomnia is not better explained by and does not occur exclusively during
 the course of another sleep-wake disorder (e.g., narcolepsy, a breathing-related
 sleep disorder, a circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, a parasomnia).
 G. The insomnia is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
 a drug of abuse, a medication).
 H. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not adequately explain
 the predominant complaint of insomnia.
 Specify if:
 With mental disorder, including substance use disorders
 With medical condition
 With another sleep disorder
 Coding note: The code F51.01 applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
 relevant associated mental disorder, medical condition, or other sleep disorder
 immediately after the code for insomnia disorder in order to indicate the
 association.
 Specify if:
 Episodic: Symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months.
Persistent: Symptoms last 3 months or longer.
 Recurrent: Two (or more) episodes within the space of 1 year.
 Note: Acute and short-term insomnia (i.e., symptoms lasting less than 3 months but
 otherwise meeting all criteria with regard to frequency, intensity, distress, and/or
 impairment) should be coded as an other specified insomnia disorder.
 Note: The diagnosis of insomnia disorder is given whether it occurs as an independent
 condition or is comorbid with another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder),
 medical condition (e.g., pain), or another sleep disorder (e.g., a breathing-related sleep
 disorder). For instance, insomnia may develop its own course with some anxiety and
 depressive features without those features meeting criteria for any one mental disorder.
 Insomnia may also manifest as a clinical feature of a more predominant mental disorder.
 Persistent insomnia is a risk factor for depression, anxiety disorders, and alcohol use
 disorder and is a common residual symptom after treatment for these conditions. When
 insomnia is comorbid with a mental disorder, treatment may need to target both
 conditions. Given these different courses, it is often impossible to establish the precise
 nature of the relationship between these clinical entities, and this relationship may
 change over time. Therefore, in the presence of insomnia and a comorbid disorder, it is
 not necessary to make a causal attribution between the two conditions. Rather, the
 diagnosis of insomnia disorder is made with concurrent specification of the comorbid
 conditions. A concurrent insomnia diagnosis should only be considered when the
 insomnia is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention; otherwise, no
 separate diagnosis is necessary.
 Recording Procedures
 The specifiers “with mental disorder, including substance use disorders”; “with medical
 condition”; and “with another sleep disorder” are available to allow the clinician to note
 clinically relevant comorbidities. In such cases, record F51.01 insomnia disorder, with [name of
 comorbid condition(s) or disorder(s)] followed by the diagnostic code(s) for the comorbid
 conditions or disorders (e.g., F51.01 insomnia disorder, with moderate cocaine use disorder and
 trigeminal neuralagia; F14.20 moderate cocaine use disorder; G50.0 trigeminal neuralgia).
 411
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of insomnia disorder is dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality with
 complaints of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep. The sleep complaints are accompanied by
 clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
 functioning. The sleep disturbance may occur during the course of another mental disorder or
 medical condition, or it may occur independently.
 Different manifestations of insomnia can occur at different times of the sleep period. Sleep
onset insomnia (or initial insomnia) involves difficulty initiating sleep at bedtime. Sleep
 maintenance insomnia (or middle insomnia) involves frequent or prolonged awakenings
throughout the night. Late insomnia involves early-morning awakening with an inability to
 return to sleep. Difficulty maintaining sleep is the most common single symptom of insomnia,
 affecting about 60% of those with insomnia, followed by early awakening and difficulty falling
 asleep, according to a U.S. national sample of health care plan members. A combination of these
 symptoms is the most common presentation overall. The specific type of sleep complaint often
 varies over time. Individuals who complain of difficulty falling asleep at one time may later
 complain of difficulty maintaining sleep, and vice versa. Symptoms of difficulty falling asleep
 and difficulty maintaining sleep can be quantified by the individual’s retrospective self-report,
 sleep diaries in which information is collected prospectively, or other methods, such as
 actigraphy or polysomnography. However, the diagnosis of insomnia disorder is based on the
 individual’s subjective perception of sleep or a caretaker’s report. Subjective reports from
 individuals with insomnia disorder frequently indicate longer sleep latencies, greater time awake
 during the night, and less total sleep time than objective (e.g. polysomnographic) data
 demonstrate. The reasons for this discrepancy are not well understood, but disturbances in the
 underlying neurophysiology reflective of hyperarousal or cortical activation are believed to play
 a role.
 Nonrestorative sleep, a complaint of poor sleep quality that does not leave the individual
 rested upon awakening despite adequate duration, is a common sleep complaint usually
 occurring in association with difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or less frequently in
 isolation. The precise relationship of isolated nonrestorative sleep to insomnia disorder remains
 unclear. The prevalence of isolated nonrestorative sleep has been estimated at about 5% and,
 unlike insomnia complaints, is reported more commonly in younger individuals. This complaint
 can also be reported in association with another sleep disorder (e.g., breathing-related sleep
 disorder). When a complaint of nonrestorative sleep occurs in isolation (i.e., in the absence of
 difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep or other sleep-wake disorders), a diagnosis of other
 specified sleep-wake disorder is made.
 Aside from the frequency and duration criteria required to make the diagnosis, additional
 guidelines are useful to quantify insomnia severity. These quantitative guidelines, while
 arbitrary, are provided for illustrative purpose only. For instance, difficulty initiating sleep is
 defined by a subjective sleep latency > 20–30 minutes, and difficulty maintaining sleep is
 defined by a subjective time awake after sleep onset > 20–30 minutes. Although there is no
 standard definition of early-morning awakening, this symptom involves awakening at least 1
 hour before the scheduled time and before total sleep time reaches 6½ hours. It is essential to
 take into account not only the final awakening time but also the bedtime on the previous evening.
 Awakening at 4:00 A.M. does not have the same clinical significance in those who go to bed at
 9:00 P.M. as in those who go to bed at 11:00 P.M. Such a symptom may also reflect an age
dependent decrease in the ability to sustain sleep or an age-dependent shift in the timing of the
 main sleep period. Although these quantitative criteria are frequently employed in research
 designs, they do not in their own right reliably distinguish individuals with insomnia from
 normal sleepers. Moreover, individuals whose presentations no longer meet subjective diagnostic
 criteria for insomnia disorder may continue to show objective disturbance by these parameters,
 as well as daytime impairment.
 412
Insomnia disorder involves daytime impairments as well as nighttime sleep difficulties.
 These include fatigue or, less commonly, daytime sleepiness; the latter is more common among
 older individuals and when insomnia is comorbid with another medical condition (e.g., chronic
 pain) or sleep disorder (e.g., sleep apnea). Impairment in cognitive performance may include
 difficulties with attention, concentration and memory, and performing complex manual skills.
 Associated mood disturbances are typically described as irritability or mood lability and less
 commonly as depressive or anxiety symptoms. Not all individuals with nighttime sleep
 disturbances are distressed or have functional impairment. For example, sleep continuity is often
 interrupted in healthy older adults who nevertheless identify themselves as good sleepers. A
 diagnosis of insomnia disorder should be reserved for those individuals with significant daytime
 distress or impairment related to their nighttime sleep difficulties.
 Associated Features
 Insomnia is often associated with physiological and cognitive arousal and conditioning factors
 that interfere with sleep. A preoccupation with sleep and distress attributable to the inability to
 sleep may lead to a vicious cycle: the more the individual strives to sleep, the more frustration
 builds and further impairs sleep. Thus, excessive attention and efforts to sleep, which override
 normal sleep-onset mechanisms, may contribute to the development of insomnia. Individuals
 with persistent insomnia may also acquire maladaptive sleep habits (e.g., spending excessive
 time in bed; following an erratic sleep schedule; napping) and cognitions (e.g., fear of
 sleeplessness; apprehensions of daytime impairments; clock monitoring) during the course of the
 disorder. Engaging in such activities in an environment in which the individual has frequently
 spent sleepless nights may further compound the conditioned arousal and perpetuate sleep
 difficulties. Conversely, the individual may fall asleep more easily when not trying to do so.
 Some individuals also report better sleep when away from their own bedrooms and their usual
 routines.
 Insomnia may be accompanied by a variety of daytime complaints and symptoms, including
 fatigue, decreased energy, and mood disturbances. Individuals with insomnia disorder may
 appear either fatigued or haggard or, conversely, overaroused and “wired.” There may be an
 increased incidence of stress-related psychophysiological symptoms (e.g., tension headache,
 muscle tension or pain, gastrointestinal symptoms); however, there are no consistent or
 characteristic abnormalities on physical examination. Symptoms of anxiety or depression that do
 not meet criteria for a specific mental disorder may be present, as well as an excessive focus on
 the perceived effects of sleep loss on daytime functioning.
 Individuals with insomnia may have elevated scores on self-report psychological or
 personality inventories with profiles indicating mild depression and anxiety, a worrisome
 cognitive style, an emotion-focused and internalizing style of conflict resolution, and a somatic
 focus. Patterns of neurocognitive impairment among individuals with insomnia disorder are
 inconsistent, although there may be impairments in performing tasks of higher complexity and
 those requiring frequent changes in performance strategy. Individuals with insomnia often
 require more effort to maintain cognitive performance.
 Prevalence
 Population-based estimates vary, depending on the sample and the criteria employed, but
indicate that, across multiple countries, about one-third of adults report insomnia symptoms,
 10%–15% experience associated daytime impairments, and 4%–22% have symptoms that meet
 criteria for insomnia disorder, with an average of about 10%. Insomnia disorder is the most
 prevalent of all sleep disorders. In primary care settings cross-nationally, approximately 20%
40% of individuals complain of significant insomnia symptoms. Prevalence rates for medical and
 psychiatric populations are significantly higher than those in the general population,
 413
 especially among individuals with mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders. Forty to fifty
 percent of individuals with an insomnia disorder have a comorbid mental disorder. Insomnia is a
 more prevalent complaint among women than among men, with a gender ratio of about 1.3:1 in
 multinational samples. The gender ratio rises to 1.7:1 after age 45. The prevalence in Norway
 among older adolescents (16–18 years) is nearly double in girls compared with boys. Although
 insomnia can be a symptom or an independent disorder, it is most frequently observed as a
 comorbid condition with another medical condition or mental disorder.
 Development and Course
 The onset of insomnia symptoms can occur at any time during life, but the first episode is more
 common in young adulthood. Less frequently, insomnia begins in childhood or adolescence. In
 women, the incidence of new-onset insomnia increases with menopause and may persist even
 after other symptoms (e.g., hot flashes) have resolved. Insomnia may have a late-life onset,
 which is often associated with the onset of other health-related conditions.
 Insomnia can be situational, persistent, or recurrent. Situational or acute insomnia usually
 lasts a few days or a few weeks and is often associated with life events or rapid changes in sleep
 schedules or environment. It usually resolves once the initial precipitating event subsides. For
 some individuals, perhaps those more vulnerable to sleep disturbances, insomnia may persist
 long after the initial triggering event, possibly because of conditioning factors and heightened
 arousal. The factors that precipitate insomnia may differ from those that perpetuate it. For
 example, an individual who is bedridden with a painful injury and has difficulty sleeping may
 then develop negative associations for sleep. Conditioned arousal may then persist and lead to
 persistent insomnia. A similar course may develop in the context of an acute psychological stress
 or a mental disorder. For instance, insomnia that occurs during an episode of major depressive
 disorder can become a focus of attention, with consequent negative conditioning, and persist
 even after resolution of the depressive episode in at least 40%–50% of individuals. In some
 cases, insomnia may also have an insidious onset without any identifiable precipitating factor.
 The course of insomnia may also be episodic, with recurrent episodes of sleep difficulties
 associated with the occurrence of stressful events. Chronicity rates range from 45% to 75% for
 follow-ups of 1–7 years. Even when the course of the insomnia has become chronic, there is
 night-to-night variability in sleep patterns, with an occasional restful night’s sleep interspersed
 with several nights of poor sleep. The characteristics of insomnia may also change over time.
 Many individuals with insomnia have a history of “light” or easily disturbed sleep prior to onset
 of more persistent sleep problems.
 Insomnia complaints are more prevalent among middle-age and older adults. The type of
insomnia symptom changes as a function of age, with difficulties initiating sleep being more
 common among young adults and problems maintaining sleep occurring more frequently among
 middle-age and older individuals.
 Difficulties initiating and maintaining sleep can also occur in children and adolescents, but
 there are more limited data on prevalence, risk factors, and comorbidity during these
 developmental phases of the life span. Sleep difficulties in childhood can result from
 conditioning factors (e.g., a child who does not learn to fall asleep or return to sleep without the
 presence of a parent) or from the absence of consistent sleep schedules and bedtime routines.
 Insomnia in adolescence is often triggered or exacerbated by irregular sleep schedules, especially
 phase delay. In both children and adolescents, psychological and medical factors can contribute
 to insomnia.
 The increased prevalence of insomnia in older adults is partly explained by the higher
 incidence of physical health problems with aging. Changes in sleep patterns associated with the
 normal developmental process must be differentiated from those exceeding age-related changes.
 Older individuals may experience significant delays in sleep onset or frequent awakenings that
 are not associated with complaints or daytime consequences. Although
 414
 polysomnography is of limited value in the routine evaluation of insomnia, it may be more
 useful in the differential diagnosis among older adults because comorbid conditions associated
 with insomnia (e.g., sleep apnea) are more common in older individuals.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 While the risk and prognostic factors discussed in this section increase vulnerability to insomnia,
 sleep disturbances are more likely to occur when predisposed individuals are exposed to
 precipitating events, such as major life events (e.g., illness, separation) or less severe but more
 chronic daily stress. Most individuals resume normal sleep patterns after the initial triggering
 event has disappeared, but others—perhaps those more vulnerable to insomnia—continue
 experiencing persistent sleep difficulties. Perpetuating factors such as poor sleep habits, irregular
 sleep scheduling, and the fear of not sleeping feed into the insomnia problem and may contribute
 to a vicious cycle that may induce persistent insomnia.
 Temperamental.
 Anxiety or worry-prone personality or cognitive styles, increased arousal
 predisposition, higher stress reactivity, and tendency to repress emotions can increase
 vulnerability to insomnia.
 Environmental.
 Noise, light, or uncomfortably high or low temperature may increase
 vulnerability to insomnia. High altitude may also predispose to insomnia attributable to periodic
 breathing difficulties during sleep.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Female sex and advancing age are associated with increased
 vulnerability to insomnia. Disrupted sleep and insomnia display a familial disposition. Thirty
five percent to seventy percent of those with insomnia disorder report one or more first-degree
 relatives (most commonly, the mother) with a history of insomnia. Heritability may be highest
 for insomnia disorder without comorbidities. The prevalence of insomnia is higher among
 monozygotic twins relative to dizygotic twins; it is also higher in first-degree family members
compared with the general population. The extent to which this link is inherited through a
 genetic predisposition, learned by observations of parental models, or established as a by-product
 of another psychopathology remains undetermined, although sleep reactivity to stress appears to
 play some role.
 Course modifiers.
 Deleterious course modifiers include poor sleep hygiene practices (e.g.,
 excessive caffeine use, irregular sleep schedules).
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Insomnia is a universal human experience. Identification of insomnia as a problem, the
 explanatory models for the condition, and associated help-seeking choices are affected by
 culture. Insomnia may be understood as a normal part of aging or of stress response, leading to
 low help-seeking or to coping via social support and traditional activities such as prayer.
 Explanatory models of insomnia vary greatly, including attributions to the effect of the
 environment (e.g., humidity) and bodily processes (e.g., poor blood circulation, internal heat)
 among others, and may be associated with nonbiomedical treatment-seeking.
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 First onset in females is often associated with the birth of a new child or with menopause.
 Despite higher prevalence among perimenopausal and postmenopausal females,
 polysomnographic studies suggest better preservation of sleep continuity and slow-wave sleep in
 older females than in older males.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Polysomnography usually shows impairments of sleep continuity (e.g., increased sleep latency
 and time awake after sleep onset and decreased sleep efficiency [percentage of time
 415
 in bed asleep]) and may show increased stage 1 sleep and decreased stage 3 sleep. The severity
 of these sleep impairments does not always match the individual’s clinical presentation or
 subjective complaint of poor sleep, as individuals with insomnia often underestimate sleep
 duration and overestimate wakefulness relative to polysomnography. Quantitative
 electroencephalographic analyses may indicate that individuals with insomnia have greater high
frequency electroencephalography power relative to good sleepers both around the sleep-onset
 period and during non–rapid eye movement sleep, although findings vary according to age and
 gender. This feature is consistent with increased cortical arousal. Neuroimaging studies have
 suggested altered regional brain function consistent with hyperarousal in insomnia, although
 interpretation of these findings is complex. Individuals with insomnia disorder may have a lower
 sleep propensity and typically do not show increased daytime sleepiness on objective sleep
 laboratory measures compared with individuals without sleep disorders.
 Other laboratory measures show evidence, although not consistently, of increased arousal
 and a generalized activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (e.g., increased cortisol
 levels, heart rate variability, reactivity to stress, increased metabolic rate). In general, findings
 are consistent with the hypothesis that increased physiological and cognitive arousal plays a
significant role in insomnia disorder.
 Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
 The symptom of insomnia has been identified as an independent risk factor for suicidal thoughts
 and behavior.
 Functional Consequences of Insomnia Disorder
 Interpersonal, social, and occupational problems may develop as a result of insomnia or
 excessive concern with sleep, increased daytime irritability, and poor concentration. Decreased
 attention and concentration are common and may be related to higher rates of accidents observed
 in individuals with insomnia. Persistent insomnia is also associated with long-term
 consequences, including twofold or greater increased risk of new-onset major depressive
 disorder, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders. Insomnia symptoms may also be a risk
 factor for relapse of major depressive disorder. Insomnia disorder, especially with objectively
 demonstrated short-sleep duration (< 6 hours), is a significant risk factor for numerous
 cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, coronary artery disease/myocardial infarction,
 congestive heart failure, and cerebrovascular disease. Increased absenteeism and reduced
 productivity at work, reduced quality of life, and increased economic burden are also significant
 functional consequences of insomnia disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Normal sleep variations.
 Normal sleep duration varies considerably across persons. Some
 individuals who require little sleep (“short sleepers”) may be concerned about their sleep
 duration. Short sleepers differ from individuals with insomnia disorder by the lack of difficulty
 falling or staying asleep and by the absence of characteristic daytime symptoms (e.g., fatigue,
 concentration problems, irritability). However, some short sleepers may desire or attempt to
 sleep for a longer period of time and, by prolonging time in bed, may create an insomnia-like
 sleep pattern. Clinical insomnia also should be distinguished from normal, age-related sleep
 changes. Insomnia must also be distinguished from sleep deprivation attributable to inadequate
 opportunity or circumstance for sleep resulting, for example, from an emergency or from
 professional or family obligations forcing the individual to stay awake.
 Situational/acute insomnia.
 Situational/acute insomnia is a condition lasting a few days to several
 weeks, often associated with acute stress due to life events or with changes in
 416
 sleep schedules. These acute or short-term insomnia symptoms may also produce significant
 distress and interfere with social, personal, and occupational functioning. When such symptoms
 are frequent enough and meet all other criteria except for the 3-month duration, a diagnosis of
 other specified insomnia disorder or unspecified insomnia disorder is made. While the disorder
 often remits with subsidence of the stress or adjustment to the change in sleep schedule, some
 individuals will develop maladaptive patterns of thought and behavior that result in the
 development of a chronic insomnia disorder.
Delayed sleep phase and shift work types of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder.
 Individuals with the
 delayed sleep phase type of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder report sleep-onset insomnia
 only when they try to sleep at socially normal times, but they do not report difficulty falling
 asleep or staying asleep when their bed and rising times are delayed and coincide with their
 endogenous circadian rhythm. This pattern is observed particularly among adolescents and
 younger adults. Shift work type differs from insomnia disorder by the history of recent shift
 work.
 Restless legs syndrome.
 Restless legs syndrome often produces difficulties initiating and
 maintaining sleep. However, an urge to move the legs and any accompanying unpleasant leg
 sensations are features that differentiate this disorder from insomnia disorder.
 Breathing-related sleep disorders.
 Most individuals with a breathing-related sleep disorder have a
 history of loud snoring, breathing pauses during sleep, and excessive daytime sleepiness.
 Nonetheless, as many as 50% of individuals with sleep apnea may also report insomnia
 symptoms, a feature that is more common among women and older adults.
 Narcolepsy.
 Narcolepsy may cause insomnia complaints but is distinguished from insomnia
 disorder by the predominance of symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, sleep
 paralysis, and sleep-related hallucinations.
 Parasomnias.
 Parasomnias are characterized by a complaint of unusual behavior or events during
 sleep that may lead to intermittent awakenings and difficulty resuming sleep. However, it is these
 behavioral events, rather than the insomnia per se, that dominate the clinical picture.
 Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type.
 Substance/medication-induced 
sleep
 disorder, insomnia type, is distinguished from insomnia disorder by the fact that a substance (i.e.,
 a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the
 insomnia (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder” later in this chapter). For
 example, insomnia occurring only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be
 diagnosed as caffeine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type, with onset during intoxication.
 Comorbidity
 Insomnia is a common comorbidity of many medical conditions, including but not limited to
 cancer, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arthritis,
 fibromyalgia, other chronic pain conditions, degenerative brain diseases, and traumatic brain
 injury. The risk relationship appears to be bidirectional: insomnia increases the risk of many of
 these medical conditions, and medical problems increase the risk of insomnia. The direction of
 the relationship is not always clear and may change over time; for this reason, comorbid
 insomnia is the preferred terminology when insomnia coexists with another medical condition
 (or mental disorder). Insomnia disorder also coexists with numerous other sleep disorders.
 Approximately one in seven individuals with insomnia disorder has moderate to severe
 obstructive sleep apnea. Rates of insomnia complaints among individuals with narcolepsy are
 estimated to be about 50%.
 417
 Individuals with insomnia disorder frequently have a comorbid mental disorder, particularly
F51.11
 bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders. Persistent insomnia represents a risk factor or an early
 symptom of subsequent bipolar, depressive, anxiety, and substance use disorders. Individuals
 with insomnia may misuse medications or alcohol to help with nighttime sleep, anxiolytics to
 combat tension or anxiety, and caffeine or other stimulants to combat excessive daytime fatigue.
 In addition to worsening the insomnia, this type of substance use may in some cases progress to a
 substance use disorder.
 Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
 The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), recognizes three
 insomnia diagnoses: chronic insomnia disorder, short-term insomnia disorder, and other
 insomnia disorder. DSM-5 insomnia disorder and ICSD-3 chronic insomnia disorder closely
 parallel each other with respect to symptom, duration, and frequency criteria; however, unlike
 DSM-5, ICSD-3 does not include a separate designation for substance/medication-induced sleep
 disorder, insomnia type.