Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder Diagnostic Criteria A. Repeated episodes of arousal during sleep associated with vocalization and/or complex motor behaviors. B. These behaviors arise during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and therefore usually occur more than 90 minutes after sleep onset, are more frequent during the later portions of the sleep period, and uncommonly occur during daytime naps. C. Upon awakening from these episodes, the individual is completely awake, alert, and not confused or disoriented. D. Either of the following: 1. REM sleep without atonia on polysomnographic recording. 2. A history suggestive of REM sleep behavior disorder and an established synucleinopathy diagnosis (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy). E. The behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (which may include injury to self or the bed partner). F. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition. G. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not explain the episodes. Diagnostic Features The essential feature of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder is repeated episodes of vocalizations and/or complex motor behaviors arising from REM sleep (Criterion A). These behaviors often reflect motor responses to the content of action-filled or violent dreams of being attacked or trying to escape from a threatening situation, which may be termed dream enacting behaviors. The vocalizations are often loud, emotion-filled, and profane. These behaviors may be very bothersome to the individual and the bed partner and 462 may result in significant injury (e.g., falling, jumping, or flying out of bed; running, punching, thrusting, hitting, or kicking). However, individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder may also present with relatively subtle vocal or motor behaviors during REM sleep, which are typically not the primary presenting sleep complaint but manifest during history taking or polysomnography in sleep, neurological, and psychiatric clinical visits. Upon awakening, the individual is usually immediately awake, alert, and oriented (Criterion C) and is often able to recall dream mentation, which closely correlates with the observed behavior. The eyes typically remain closed during these events. The presence of REM sleep without atonia during a polysomnogram is typically required for the diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disorder. Alternatively, if polysomnography has not been performed, a provisional diagnosis of probable REM sleep behavior disorder may be given if there is an established synucleinopathy diagnosis (e.g., Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy) and the history is suggestive of REM sleep behavior disorder (Criterion D). The diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disorder requires clinically significant distress or impairment (Criterion E); this determination will depend on a number of factors, including the frequency of events, the potential for violence or injurious behaviors, embarrassment, and distress in other household members. Severity determination is best made based on the nature or consequence of the behavior rather than simply on frequency. Although the behaviors are typically prominent and violent, lesser behaviors may also occur. Prevalence The prevalence of REM sleep behavior disorder was approximately 1% in a middle- to older-age general population sample in Switzerland and approximately 2% in an elderly general population sample in South Korea. One prevalence study found an equal prevalence between men and women in individuals younger than 50 years, while another study reported a prevalence of just over 1% with no difference between men and women in a population with a mean age of 59 years. Prevalence in individuals with psychiatric disorders may be greater, possibly related to medications prescribed for the psychiatric disorder. Development and Course The onset of REM sleep behavior disorder may be gradual or rapid. Because of the very high association with the later appearance of an underlying neurodegenerative disorder, the neurological status of individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder should be closely monitored. In individuals with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder, the risk of developing a defined neurodegenerative disease, most often a synucleinopathy (i.e., Parkinson’s disease, major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, or multiple system atrophy), is approximately 75% within 10–15 years following diagnosis, with an annualized risk of approximately 6%–7% per year. Symptoms in young individuals, particularly young women, should raise the possibility of narcolepsy; substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type; a brainstem lesion; or an autoimmune encephalopathy. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues Chinese individuals diagnosed with REM sleep behavior disorder by a neurology service in Taiwan had similar clinical and laboratory characteristics as non-Latinx White individuals in the United States; however, they differed in having a higher rate of nocturnal wandering out of the bedroom and a lower rate of sleep-related injuries, possibly as a result of earlier detection by the family. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Other parasomnias. REM sleep behavior disorder is more common in men older than 50 years, but increasingly this disorder is being identified in women and in younger individuals. Women are younger than men in age at onset and age at diagnosis. 463 Diagnostic Markers Associated laboratory findings from polysomnography indicate increased tonic and/or phasic electromyographic activity during REM sleep, which is normally associated with muscle atonia. The increased muscle activity variably affects different muscle groups; more extensive electromyographic monitoring with arm electromyography (e.g., biceps brachii) should be considered because this measure is more specific for a REM sleep behavior disorder diagnosis. It is suggested that electromyographic monitoring also include the submentalis, bilateral flexor digitorum superficialis, and bilateral anterior tibialis muscle groups. Continuous video monitoring should accompany the polysomnography. Other polysomnographic findings may include very frequent periodic and aperiodic extremity electromyography activity during non- REM (NREM) sleep. REM sleep without atonia is present in virtually all cases of REM sleep behavior disorder but may also be an asymptomatic polysomnographic finding. It is not known whether isolated REM sleep without atonia is a precursor to REM sleep behavior disorder, although a pilot study suggested that isolated REM sleep without atonia may also be associated with neurodegenerative markers (i.e., hyposmia, orthostatic hypotension, color vision loss) and that 7%–14% of individuals with isolated REM sleep without atonia later develop clinical REM sleep behavior disorder. Thresholds for normative REM sleep without atonia levels have also been published that may serve to distinguish borderline cases and those whose neurological status should be further monitored. Functional Consequences of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder The most serious consequences of REM sleep behavior disorder are the short-term risks for injury to the individual or bed partner related to attacks of dream enactment, and the long-term risk of developing a defined neurodegenerative disease. According to surveys of individuals and their bed partners, approximately 55% of individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder may experience injury as a consequence of their attacks, with 12% of injuries being serious (including long bone or rib fractures or subdural hematomas) and requiring medical attention. Differential Diagnosis Confusional arousals, sleepwalking, and sleep terrors can easily be confused with REM sleep behavior disorder. In general, these disorders occur in individuals younger than 50 years. Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, they arise from NREM sleep and therefore tend to occur in the early portion of the sleep period. Awakening from a confusional arousal is associated with confusion, disorientation, and incomplete recall of dream mentation accompanying the behavior. Polysomnographic monitoring in the disorders of arousal generally reveals normal REM sleep atonia unless there is a comorbid parasomnia. Medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type. Asymptomatic REM sleep without atonia. Nocturnal seizures. Obstructive sleep apnea. Other specified dissociative disorder (sleep-related psychogenic dissociative disorder). Malingering. Many widely prescribed medications, including tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, may result in polysomnographic evidence of REM sleep without atonia and in frank REM sleep behavior disorder, which is diagnosed as a medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type. It is not known whether the medications per se result in REM sleep without atonia and/or REM sleep behavior disorder, or whether they unmask an underlying predisposition. Clinical dream-enacting behaviors coupled with the polysomnographic finding of REM sleep without atonia is necessary for the diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disorder. REM sleep without atonia without a clinical history of dream-enacting behaviors is simply an asymptomatic polysomnographic observation with an as yet unknown clinical significance. 464 Nocturnal seizures may mimic REM sleep behavior disorder, but the behaviors characteristic of nocturnal seizures are generally stereotyped. Polysomnographic monitoring employing a full electroencephalographic seizure montage may differentiate the two. REM sleep without atonia is generally not present on polysomnographic monitoring in individuals with epilepsy. Obstructive sleep apnea may result in vocalizations and motor behaviors that very closely resemble REM sleep behavior disorder, such as talking, shouting, gesturing, and punching, along with unpleasant dreams. Polysomnographic monitoring is necessary to differentiate between these two disorders. In REM sleep behavior disorder, the parasomnia symptoms occur during periods of REM sleep without atonia. In obstructive sleep apnea, the parasomnia symptoms only occur during arousals at the end of the obstructive sleep apneic events and resolve following effective treatment of the obstructive sleep apnea (continuous positive airway pressure). REM sleep without atonia is not typically observed in obstructive sleep apnea. Unlike virtually all other parasomnias, which arise precipitously from NREM or REM sleep, psychogenic dissociative behaviors arise from a period of well-defined wakefulness during the sleep period. Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, this condition is more prevalent in young women. Many cases of malingering in which the individual reports problematic sleep movements mimic the clinical features of REM sleep behavior disorder, and polysomnographic documentation is mandatory. Comorbidity REM sleep behavior disorder is present concurrently in approximately 30% of patients with narcolepsy. When it occurs in narcolepsy, the demographics reflect the younger age range of narcolepsy, with equal frequency in men and women. Based on findings from individuals presenting to sleep clinics, most individuals (>70%) with initially “idiopathic” REM sleep behavior disorder will eventually develop a neurodegenerative disease—most notably, one of the G25.81 synucleinopathies (Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy, or major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies). REM sleep behavior disorder often predates any other sign of these disorders by many years (often more than a decade). Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders REM sleep behavior disorder is virtually identical to REM sleep behavior disorder in the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition.