Hypersomnolence Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Self-reported excessive sleepiness (hypersomnolence) despite a main sleep
 period lasting at least 7 hours, with at least one of the following symptoms:
 1. Recurrent periods of sleep or lapses into sleep within the same day.
 2. A prolonged main sleep episode of more than 9 hours per day that is
 nonrestorative (i.e., unrefreshing).
 3. Difficulty being fully awake after abrupt awakening.
 B. The hypersomnolence occurs at least three times per week, for at least 3
 months.
 C. The hypersomnolence is accompanied by significant distress or impairment in
 cognitive, social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 D. The hypersomnolence is not better explained by and does not occur exclusively
 during the course of another sleep disorder (e.g., narcolepsy, breathing-related
 sleep disorder, circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, or a parasomnia).
 E. The hypersomnolence is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
 substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
 F. Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not adequately explain the
 predominant complaint of hypersomnolence.
 Specify if:
 With mental disorder, including substance use disorders
 With medical condition
 With another sleep disorder
Coding note: The code F51.11 applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
 relevant associated mental disorder, medical condition, or other sleep disorder
 immediately after the code for hypersomnolence disorder in order to indicate the
 association.
 Specify if:
 Acute: Duration of less than 1 month.
 Subacute: Duration of 1–3 months.
 Persistent: Duration of more than 3 months.
 418
 Specify current severity:
 Specify severity based on degree of difficulty maintaining daytime alertness as
 manifested by the occurrence of multiple attacks of irresistible sleepiness within any
 given day occurring, for example, while sedentary, driving, visiting with friends, or
 working.
 Mild: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 1–2 days/week.
 Moderate: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 3–4 days/week.
 Severe: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 5–7 days/week.
 Recording Procedures
 The specifiers “with mental disorder, including substance use disorders”; “with medical
 condition”; and “with another sleep disorder” are available to allow the clinician to note
 clinically relevant comorbidities. In such cases, record F51.11 hypersomnolence disorder, with
 [name of comorbid condition(s) or disorder(s)] followed by the diagnostic code(s) for the
 comorbid conditions or disorders (e.g., F51.11 hypersomnolence disorder, with major depressive
 disorder; F33.1 major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate).
 Diagnostic Features
 Hypersomnolence disorder includes symptoms of excessive quantity of sleep (e.g., extended
 nocturnal sleep or long naps), sleepiness, and sleep inertia (i.e., a period of impaired
 performance and reduced vigilance following awakening from the regular sleep episode or from
 a nap) (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder generally fall asleep quickly and have a good
 sleep efficiency (> 90%). Individuals typically feel sleepiness developing over a period of time,
 rather than experiencing a sudden sleep “attack.” Unintentional sleep episodes typically occur in
 sedentary situations (e.g., while attending lectures, reading, watching television, or driving long
 distances), but in more severe cases they can manifest in high-attention situations such as at
 work, in meetings, or at social gatherings. The persistent need for sleep can lead to automatic
 behavior (usually of a very routine, low-complexity type) that the individual carries out with
 little or no subsequent recall. For example, individuals may find themselves having driven
 several miles from where they thought they were, unaware of the “automatic” driving they did in
 the preceding minutes.
About 40% of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder may have sleep inertia (also
 referred to as “sleep drunkenness”), and this symptom may help differentiate hypersomnolence
 disorder from other causes of sleepiness. They may have difficulty waking up in the morning,
 sometimes appearing confused, combative, or ataxic. Individuals may set multiple alarm clocks
 or rely on others to help get them out of bed. Sleep inertia can also occur upon awakening from a
 daytime nap. During that period, the individual appears awake, but motor coordination is
 impaired, behavior may be inappropriate, and memory deficits, disorientation in time and space,
 and feelings of grogginess may occur. This period may last some minutes to hours.
 For some individuals with hypersomnolence disorder, the major sleep episode (for most
 individuals, nocturnal sleep) has a duration of 9 hours or more. In the most extreme cases, sleep
 episodes can last up to 20 hours. However, the sleep is often nonrestorative and is followed by
 difficulty awakening in the morning. For other individuals with hypersomnolence disorder, the
 major sleep episode is of normal nocturnal sleep duration (7–9 hours), and they take relatively
 long daytime naps (> 1 hour) that do not improve alertness. Most individuals with
 hypersomnolence disorder take daytime naps nearly every day regardless of the nocturnal sleep
 duration. While many individuals with hypersomnolence are able to reduce their sleep time
 during working days, weekend and holiday sleep is greatly increased (by up to 3 hours).
 419
 Associated Features
 Approximately 80% of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder report that their sleep is
 nonrestorative, but this symptom is nonspecific and can occur with disorders that disrupt sleep,
 such as obstructive sleep apnea. Naps are often long (> 1 hour) and unrefreshing. Short naps (i.e.,
 duration of < 30 minutes) are often unrefreshing. Individuals with hypersomnolence often appear
 sleepy and may even fall asleep in the clinician’s waiting area.
 A subset of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder have a family history of
 hypersomnolence and also have symptoms of autonomic nervous system dysfunction, including
 recurrent vascular-type headaches, reactivity of the peripheral vascular system (Raynaud’s
 phenomenon), and fainting.
 Prevalence
 Approximately 5%–10% of individuals in the United States who consult in sleep disorder clinics
 with complaints of daytime sleepiness are diagnosed as having hypersomnolence disorder. It is
 estimated that about 1% of the European and U.S. general population has episodes of sleep
 inertia. Hypersomnolence occurs with relatively equal frequency in men and women.
 Development and Course
 Hypersomnolence disorder usually begins in late adolescence or early adulthood, with a mean
 age at onset of 17–24 years and a gradual progression over weeks to months. Little is known of
 the natural history, but for most individuals, the symptoms are persistent and stable, unless
 treatment is initiated. Spontaneous remission occurs in about 11%–25% of individuals after 5–7
 years. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder are diagnosed, on average, 10–15 years after
 the appearance of the first symptoms. Pediatric cases are rare. The development of other sleep
disorders (e.g., breathing-related sleep disorder) may worsen the degree of sleepiness.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Environmental.
 Hypersomnolence can be increased temporarily by psychological stress and
 alcohol use, but they have not been documented as environmental precipitating factors. Viral
 infections have been reported to have preceded or accompanied hypersomnolence in about 10%
 of cases. Hypersomnolence is common in the months after traumatic brain injury.
 Genetic and physiological.
 of inheritance.
 Hypersomnolence may be familial, with an autosomal-dominant mode
 Diagnostic Markers
 Nocturnal polysomnography demonstrates a normal to prolonged sleep duration, short sleep
 latency, and normal to increased sleep continuity. The nocturnal distribution of rapid eye
 movement (REM) sleep is also normal. Sleep efficiency is typically > 90%. The multiple sleep
 latency test documents sleep tendency, typically indicated by mean sleep latency values of < 8
 minutes. In hypersomnolence disorder, the mean sleep latency is typically < 10 minutes and
 frequently 8 minutes or less. Sleep-onset REM periods (i.e., the occurrence of REM sleep within
 20 minutes of sleep onset) may be present but occur infrequently. Unfortunately, the multiple
 sleep latency test has poor test-retest reliability, and it does not distinguish well between
 hypersomnolence disorder and narcolepsy type 2.
 420
 A 2-week sleep diary can help document amounts and timing of sleep, and actigraphy
 provides more accurate data on habitual sleep patterns. In a 32-hour bed rest protocol in which
 subjects were encouraged to sleep ad lib, individuals with hypersomnolence disorder slept > 4
 hours more than control subjects.
 Functional Consequences of Hypersomnolence Disorder
 The low level of alertness that occurs while an individual fights the need for sleep can lead to
 reduced efficiency, diminished concentration, and poor memory during daytime activities.
 Hypersomnolence can lead to significant distress and dysfunction in work and social
 relationships. Prolonged nocturnal sleep and difficulty awakening can result in difficulty in
 meeting morning obligations, such as arriving at work on time. Unintentional daytime sleep
 episodes can be embarrassing and even dangerous, if, for instance, the individual is driving or
 operating machinery when the episode occurs.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Normative variation in sleep.
 “Normal” sleep duration varies considerably in the general
 population. “Long sleepers” (i.e., persons who require a greater than average amount of sleep) do
 not have excessive sleepiness, sleep inertia, or automatic behavior when they obtain their
 required amount of nocturnal sleep. Sleep is reported to be refreshing. If social or occupational
 demands lead to shorter nocturnal sleep, daytime symptoms may appear. In hypersomnolence
disorder, by contrast, symptoms of excessive sleepiness occur regardless of nocturnal sleep
 duration.
 An inadequate amount of nocturnal sleep, or behaviorally induced insufficient sleep
 syndrome, can produce symptoms of daytime sleepiness very similar to those of
 hypersomnolence disorder. An average sleep duration of fewer than 7 hours per night strongly
 suggests inadequate nocturnal sleep, yet in the United States, the average adult obtains only 6.75
 hours of sleep on typical weeknights. Individuals with inadequate nocturnal sleep typically
 “catch up” with longer sleep durations on days when they are free from social or occupational
 demands or on vacations. A diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder should not be made if there
 is a question regarding the adequacy of nocturnal sleep duration. A diagnostic and therapeutic
 trial of sleep extension for 10–14 days can often clarify the diagnosis.
 Narcolepsy.
 As in hypersomnolence disorder, individuals with narcolepsy have chronic
 sleepiness, but several clinical and laboratory findings help distinguish the disorders. In contrast
 to those with hypersomnolence disorder, individuals with narcolepsy tend to sleep 7–8 hours
 each day and generally feel refreshed on waking in the morning. Individuals with narcolepsy
 generally feel more alert after a 15- to 20-minute nap, whereas those with hypersomnolence
 disorder tend to take longer naps, have trouble waking from naps, and do not feel alert afterward.
 Individuals with narcolepsy also have varying amounts of cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations,
 sleep paralysis, and fragmented nocturnal sleep, whereas cataplexy never occurs in
 hypersomnolence disorder and the other symptoms are uncommon. The multiple sleep latency
 test typically shows more than two sleep-onset REM periods in narcolepsy.
 Fatigue as a symptom of another mental disorder or medical condition.
 Hypersomnolence 
disorder
 should be distinguished from tiredness related to fatigue that may be a symptom of another
 mental disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder) or medical condition (e.g., chronic fatigue
 syndrome). Unlike hypersomnolence, tiredness is not necessarily relieved by increased sleep and
 is unrelated to sleep quantity or quality.
 421
 Breathing-related sleep disorders.
 Chronic sleepiness is common in breathing-related sleep
 disorders. Individuals with hypersomnolence and breathing-related sleep disorders may have
 similar patterns of excessive sleepiness. Breathing-related sleep disorders are suggested by a
 history of loud snoring, pauses in breathing during sleep, and nonrefreshing sleep. Examination
 often reveals obesity, a small airway, and large neck diameter. Hypertension is common, and
 some individuals may demonstrate signs of heart failure. Polysomnographic studies can confirm
 the presence of apneic events in breathing-related sleep disorder (and their absence in
 hypersomnolence disorder).
 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
 In contrast to individuals with hypersomnolence disorder,
 individuals with specific subtypes of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder show specific
 temporal patterns of symptoms. For example, individuals with delayed sleep phase type often
 have sleep inertia and sleepiness in the morning and feel most alert in the evening and night, with
 habitually late bedtimes. In contrast, those with advanced sleep phase type become sleepy and go
 to bed early in the evening but are alert and wake easily in the early morning.
 Parasomnias.
 Parasomnias such as non–REM sleep arousal disorders (sleepwalking/sleep terrors)
Hypersomnolence in other mental disorders and medical conditions.
 or REM sleep behavior disorder rarely produce the prolonged, undisturbed nocturnal sleep or
 daytime sleepiness characteristic of hypersomnolence disorder. However, parasomnias such as
 nightmare disorder, which may result in significant curtailment of total sleep time, may
 conceivably manifest with daytime sleepiness.
 Hypersomnolence disorder must
 be distinguished from hypersomnolence occurring as a symptom of another mental disorder (e.g.,
 major depressive episode, especially episodes with atypical features) or medical condition (e.g.,
 certain cancers, multiple sclerosis). If the predominant complaint of excessive sleepiness is
 adequately explained by another mental disorder or medical condition, then an additional
 diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is not warranted. However, if the hypersomnolence is not
 adequately explained by a comorbid mental disorder or medical condition (e.g., the severity and
 nature of the hypersomnolence far exceed what would be expected with the mental disorder or
 medical condition), an additional diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is warranted.
 Comorbidity
 Many individuals with hypersomnolence disorder have symptoms of depression that may meet
 criteria for a depressive disorder. This presentation may be related to the psychosocial
 consequences of persistent increased sleep need. More than half of individuals with
 hypersomnolence disorder have attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms. Individuals
 with hypersomnolence disorder are also at risk for substance-related disorders, particularly
 related to self-medication with stimulants. This general lack of specificity may contribute to very
 heterogeneous profiles among individuals whose symptoms meet the diagnostic criteria for
 hypersomnolence disorder. Neurodegenerative conditions, such as Alzheimer’s disease,
 Parkinson’s disease, and multiple system atrophy, may also be associated with hypersomnolence.
 Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
 The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), differentiates nine
 subtypes of “central disorders of hypersomnolence,” including disorders not covered in DSM
 such as Kleine-Levin syndrome (recurrent episodes of hypersomnia), hypersomnolence due to a
 medical/neurological condition or substance use, and insufficient sleep syndrome.
 422