Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. A prominent and severe disturbance in sleep.
 B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
 of both (1) and (2):
 1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
 intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
 medication.
 2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
 Criterion A.
 C. The disturbance is not better explained by a sleep disorder that is not
 substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sleep disorder
 could include the following:
 The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
 symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
 the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
 evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non
substance/medication-related episodes).
 D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
 E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
 occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
 Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
 intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
 predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
 clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
 sleep disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
 depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
 the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a
 substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid
 with the substance-induced sleep disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the
 clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced
 sleep disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sleep
 disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the
 substance-induced sleep disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician
 should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use
 disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there
 is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the
 substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should record
 only the substance-induced sleep disorder.
 There are two exceptions to this coding convention as it applies to caffeine- and
 tobacco-induced sleep disorders. Because caffeine use disorder is not an official
 DSM-5 category,
 469
 there is only a single ICD-10-CM code for caffeine-induced sleep disorder: F15.982.
 Moreover, because ICD-10-CM assumes that tobacco-induced sleep disorder can
 only occur in the context of moderate or severe tobacco use disorder, the ICD-10
CM code for tobacco-induced sleep disorder is F17.208.
 ICD-10-CM
 With mild use
 disorder
 With moderate or
 severe use disorder
 Without use
 disorder
 Alcohol F10.182 F10.282 F10.982
 Caffeine NA NA F15.982
 Cannabis F12.188 F12.288 F12.988
 Opioid F11.182 F11.282 F11.982
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic F13.182 F13.282 F13.982
 Amphetamine-type substance (or other
 stimulant)
 F15.182 F15.282 F15.982
 Cocaine F14.182 F14.282 F14.982
 Tobacco NA F17.208 NA
 Other (or unknown) substance F19.182 F19.282 F19.982
 Specify whether:
 Insomnia type: Characterized by difficulty falling asleep or maintaining sleep,
 frequent nocturnal awakenings, or nonrestorative sleep.
 Daytime sleepiness type: Characterized by predominant complaint of
excessive sleepiness/fatigue during waking hours or, less commonly, a long
 sleep period.
 Parasomnia type: Characterized by abnormal behavioral events during sleep.
 Mixed type: Characterized by a substance/medication-induced sleep problem
 characterized by multiple types of sleep symptoms, but no symptom clearly
 predominates.
 Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
 which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
 withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
 medication use”):
 With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
 substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication.
 With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
 substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
 With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
 medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
 medication.
 Recording Procedures
 The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the specific substance
 (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sleep disturbance. The ICD-10-CM code that
 corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the criteria set. For
 substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10-CM code for the
 other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name
 470
 of the specific substance recorded (e.g., F19.982 fluoxetine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia
 type). In cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
 substance is unknown, the ICD-10-CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used
 and the fact that the substance is unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.982 unknown substance
induced sleep disorder, hypersomnia type).
 To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
 first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced sleep disorder” (incorporating the name of
 the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e., with
 onset during intoxication, with onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use),
 followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia
 type, mixed type). For example, in the case of insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a man
 with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.282 severe lorazepam use disorder
 with lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. A separate
 diagnosis of the comorbid severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
 sleep disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., with medication use as
prescribed), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F19.982 bupropion-induced
 sleep disorder, with onset during medication use, insomnia type). When more than one substance
 is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should be
 listed separately (e.g., F10.282 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced sleep disorder,
 with onset during intoxication, insomnia type; F14.282 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine
induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type).
 Specifiers
 Depending on the substance involved, one of four types of sleep disturbances is indicated.
 Insomnia type and daytime sleepiness type are most common, whereas parasomnia type is seen
 less often. The mixed type is noted when more than one type of sleep disturbance–related
 symptom is present and none predominates.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential feature of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is a prominent sleep
 disturbance that is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion A). The
 sleep disturbance may be characterized by insomnia, daytime sleepiness, a parasomnia, or some
 combination of these. The sleep disturbance is judged to be primarily associated with the
 pharmacological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, toxin exposure)
 (Criterion B). The disturbance must not be better explained by another sleep disorder that is not
 substance/medication-induced (Criterion C). A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is
 distinguished from insomnia disorder or a disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepiness
 by considering onset and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence of intoxication or
 withdrawal 
from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings.
 Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder arises only in association with intoxication or
 discontinuation/withdrawal states, whereas other sleep disorders may precede the onset of
 substance use or occur during times of sustained abstinence. As discontinuation/withdrawal
 states for some substances can be protracted, onset of the sleep disturbance can occur 4 weeks
 after cessation of substance use, and the disturbance may have features atypical of other sleep
 disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). The diagnosis is not made if the sleep
 disturbance occurs only during a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically
 significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
 (Criterion E). This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
 substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture
 and when the symptoms warrant independent clinical attention.
 471
 Associated Features
 During periods of substance/medication use, intoxication, or withdrawal, individuals frequently
 complain of dysphoric mood, including depression and anxiety, irritability, cognitive
 impairment, inability to concentrate, and fatigue.
 Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with intoxication with the
 following classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown) substances. Prominent and
 severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with withdrawal from the following classes of
 substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants
 (including cocaine); tobacco; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that invoke sleep
 disturbances include adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists,
 cholinergic agonists and antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, and
 corticosteroids.
 Alcohol.
 Alcohol-induced sleep disorder typically occurs as insomnia type. During acute
 intoxication with doses > 1 g/kg, alcohol produces an immediate sedative effect depending on
 dose, accompanied by a reduction in sleep latency, increased non–rapid eye movement (NREM)
 sleep stages 2 and 3 (N2 and N3), and reduced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Following
 these initial effects, there may be increased wakefulness, restless sleep, and vivid and anxiety
laden dreams for the remaining sleep period. In parallel, N2 and N3 are reduced, and
 wakefulness and REM sleep are increased during the latter portion of the night. With habitual
 use, alcohol continues to show a short-lived sedative effect in the first half of the night, followed
 by sleep continuity disruption in the second half. During acute alcohol withdrawal, there is
 extremely disrupted sleep continuity, and an increased amount and intensity of REM sleep,
 associated frequently with vivid dreaming, which in extreme form constitutes part of alcohol
 withdrawal delirium. After acute withdrawal, chronic alcohol users may continue to complain of
 light, fragmented sleep for months to years associated with a persistent prolongation of sleep
 latency and deficit in slow-wave sleep. Alcohol also aggravates breathing-related sleep disorder,
 including obstructive sleep apnea and sleep-related hypoventilation.
 Caffeine.
 Caffeine consumed in low to moderate doses during the morning hours typically
 produces no significant effect on nighttime sleep in normal sleepers or those with insomnia.
 Caffeine may produce insomnia in a dose- and timing–dependent manner, particularly when
 larger doses are consumed later in the day or during evening hours. Prolongation of sleep
 latency, reduction of slow-wave sleep, increased nocturnal awakening, and reduced sleep
 duration are reported. Some individuals, particularly high consumers, may present with daytime
 sleepiness and performance impairments related to withdrawal.
 Cannabis.
 Acute administration of cannabis may shorten sleep latency, though arousing effects
 with increments in sleep latency also occur. Cannabis enhances slow-wave sleep and suppresses
 REM sleep after acute administration. In chronic users, tolerance to the sleep-inducing and slow
wave sleep–enhancing effects develops. Upon withdrawal, sleep difficulties and unpleasant
 dreams have been reported lasting for several weeks. Polysomnographic studies demonstrate
 reduced slow-wave sleep and increased REM sleep during this phase.
 Opioids.
 Opioids may produce an increase in sleepiness and in subjective depth of sleep, and
 reduced REM and slow-wave sleep, during acute short-term use. With continued administration,
 tolerance to the sedative effects of opioids develops and there are complaints of insomnia.
 Polysomnographic studies demonstrate reduced sleep efficiency and total sleep time, with
 reduction of slow-wave sleep and possibly REM sleep. Consistent with their respiratory
 depressant effects, opioids exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea. Emergence of central sleep apnea
 is also observed, especially with chronic use of longer-acting opioids.
 472
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances.
 hypnotics, 
and 
anxiolytics 
(e.g.,
 Sedatives, 
barbiturates, benzodiazepine receptor agonists, meprobamate, glutethimide, methyprylon) have
 similar effects as opioids on sleep. During acute intoxication, sedative-hypnotic drugs produce
 the expected increase in sleepiness and decrease in wakefulness. Daytime sleepiness may occur,
 primarily with longer-acting agents. Chronic benzodiazepine use may be associated with
 development of tolerance, rebound insomnia, and potentially serious withdrawal effects. Newer
 benzodiazepine receptor agonists such as zolpidem and eszopiclone have been shown to maintain
 efficacy over periods of 6 months to 2 years, without evidence of dosage escalation or major
 withdrawal effects. Newer hypnotic agents such as ramelteon, low-dose doxepin, and suvorexant
 do not appear to have significant abuse potential, respiratory depression, or major withdrawal
 syndromes. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs with short durations of action are most likely
 to produce complaints of rebound insomnia. Some sedative-hypnotic drugs may increase the
 frequency and severity of obstructive sleep apnea events, although neither benzodiazepines nor
 benzodiazepine receptor agonists have been found to definitively worsen obstructive sleep apnea.
 Hypoventilation may worsen in susceptible individuals. Parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleep
related eating) have been associated with use of benzodiazepine receptor agonists, especially
 when these medications are taken at higher doses and when they are combined with other
 sedative drugs.
 Amphetamine-type substances, other stimulants, and MDMA.
 Sleep 
disorders 
induced 
by
 amphetamine-type substances and other stimulants are characterized by insomnia during
 intoxication and excessive sleepiness during withdrawal. During acute intoxication, stimulants
 reduce the total amount of sleep, increase sleep latency and sleep continuity disturbances, and
 decrease REM sleep. Slow-wave sleep tends to be reduced. During withdrawal from chronic
 stimulant use, there is both prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and excessive daytime sleepiness.
 Multiple sleep latency tests may show increased daytime sleepiness during the withdrawal phase.
 Drugs like 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; “ecstasy”) and related substances
 lead to restless and disturbed sleep within 48 hours of intake; frequent use of these compounds is
 associated with persisting symptoms of anxiety, depression, and sleep disturbances, even during
 longer-term abstinence. There is also evidence that suggests an increased frequency of
 obstructive sleep apnea in young MDMA users, even after a period of abstention from the drug.
 Tobacco.
 Chronic tobacco use is associated primarily with symptoms of insomnia, decreased
 slow-wave sleep with a reduction of sleep efficiency, and increased daytime sleepiness.
 Withdrawal from tobacco can lead to impaired sleep. Individuals who smoke heavily may
 experience regular nocturnal awakenings caused by tobacco craving.
 Other or unknown substances/medications.
 Other substances/medications may produce sleep
 disturbances, particularly medications that affect the central or autonomic nervous systems (e.g.,
 adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists, cholinergic agonists and
 antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, corticosteroids).
 Development and Course
 Insomnia in children can be identified by either a parent or the child. Often the child has a clear
 sleep disturbance associated with initiation of a medication but may not report symptoms,
 although parents observe the sleep disturbances. The use of some recreational substances (e.g.,
cannabis, ecstasy) is prevalent in adolescence and early adulthood. Insomnia or any other sleep
 disturbance encountered in this age group should prompt careful consideration of whether the
 sleep disturbance is attributable to consumption of these substances. Help-seeking behavior for
 the sleep disturbance in these age groups is limited, and
 473
 thus corroborative report may be elicited from a parent, caregiver, or teacher. Older individuals
 take more medications and are at increased risk for developing a substance/medication-induced
 sleep disorder. They may interpret sleep disturbance as part of normal aging and fail to report
 symptoms. Individuals with major neurocognitive disorder (e.g., dementia) are at risk for
 substance/medication-induced sleep disorders but may not report symptoms, making
 corroborative report from caregiver(s) particularly important.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Risk and prognostic factors involved in substance or medication use are normative for certain
 age groups. They are relevant for, and likely applicable to, the type of sleep disturbance
 encountered (see the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for descriptions of
 respective substance use disorders).
 Temperamental.
 Substance use generally precipitates or accompanies insomnia in vulnerable
 individuals. Thus, presence of insomnia in response to stress or change in sleep environment or
 timing can represent a risk for developing substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. A
 similar risk may be present for individuals with other sleep disorders (e.g., individuals with
 hypersomnia who use stimulants).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 The same amount and duration of consumption of a given substance may lead to highly different
 sleep-related outcomes in males and females based on, for example, sex-specific differences in
 hepatic functioning.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Each of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorders produces electroencephalographic
 sleep patterns that are associated with, but cannot be considered diagnostic of, other disorders.
 The electroencephalographic sleep profile for each substance is related to the stage of use and
 whether it is in the context of intake/intoxication, chronic use, or withdrawal following
 discontinuation of the substance. All-night polysomnography can help define the severity of
 insomnia complaints, while the multiple sleep latency test provides information about the
 severity of daytime sleepiness. Monitoring of nocturnal respiration and periodic limb movements
 with polysomnography may verify a substance’s impact on nocturnal breathing and motor
 behavior. Sleep diaries for 2 weeks and actigraphy are considered helpful in confirming the
 presence of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, especially in the case of suspected
 insomnia type. Drug screening can be of use when the individual is not aware or unwilling to
 relate information about substance intake.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep
 Disorder
 While there are many functional consequences associated with sleep disorders, the only unique
 consequence for substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is increased risk for relapse. For
 example, the degree of sleep disturbance during alcohol withdrawal (e.g., REM sleep rebound)
 predicts risk of relapse of drinking. Monitoring of sleep quality and daytime sleepiness during
 and after withdrawal may provide clinically meaningful information on whether an individual is
 at increased risk for relapse.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
 Sleep disturbances are commonly encountered in
 the context of substance intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of
 substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be made instead of a
 474
 diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the sleep disturbance is
 predominant in the clinical picture and is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
 attention.
 Delirium.
 If the substance/medication-induced sleep disturbance occurs exclusively during the
 course of a delirium, it is not diagnosed separately.
 Other sleep disorders.
 A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is distinguished from
 another sleep disorder if a substance/medication is judged to be etiologically related to the
 symptoms. A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder attributed to a prescribed medication
 for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its onset while the individual is receiving
 the medication or during discontinuation, if there is a discontinuation/withdrawal syndrome
 associated with the medication. Once treatment is discontinued, the sleep disturbance will
 usually remit within days to several weeks. If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes for
 the sleep disturbance–related symptoms should be considered. Not infrequently, individuals with
 another sleep disorder use medications or drugs of abuse to self-medicate their symptoms (e.g.,
 alcohol for management of insomnia). If the substance/medication is judged to play a significant
 role in the exacerbation of the sleep disturbance, an additional diagnosis of a
 substance/medication-induced sleep disorder may be warranted.
 Sleep disorder associated with medical condition.
 Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder and
 sleep disorders with a medical condition (i.e., insomnia disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, and
 nightmare disorder) may produce similar symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, or
 nightmares, respectively. Many medical conditions that cause sleep disturbance are treated with
 medications that may also cause sleep disturbances. The chronology of symptoms is the most
 important factor in distinguishing between these two sources of sleep symptoms. Difficulties
 with sleep in an individual with a comorbid medical condition that clearly preceded the use of
 any medication for treatment of that medical condition would suggest a diagnosis of insomnia
 disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, or nightmare disorder with the specifier “with [specific
 medical condition]” applicable to the diagnosis. Conversely, sleep symptoms that appear only
after the initiation of a particular substance/medication suggest a substance/medication-induced
 sleep disorder. If the sleep disturbance is comorbid with another medical condition and is also
 exacerbated by substance use, both diagnoses are given (i.e., insomnia disorder,
 hypersomnolence disorder, or nightmare disorder, “with [specific medical condition]”
 respectively; and [specific substance/medication]-induced sleep disorder). When there is
 insufficient evidence to determine whether the sleep disturbance is attributable to a
 substance/medication or a medical condition, or independent (i.e., not attributable to either a
 substance/medication or a medical condition), a diagnosis of unspecified sleep-wake disorder is
 indicated.
 Comorbidity
 See the “Comorbidity” sections for other sleep disorders in this chapter, including insomnia
 disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, central sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and
 circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, shift work type.
 Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
 The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), lists sleep disorders
 “due to a medication or substance” under their respective phenotypes (e.g., hypersomnia,
 movement disorder, parasomnia). ICSD-3 does not identify a separate diagnosis for “insomnia
 due to a medication or substance” based on evidence that the reliability of distinguishing
 specific, single etiological factors for chronic insomnia is poor.
 475