Nightmare Disorder Diagnostic Criteria A. Repeated occurrences of extended, extremely dysphoric, and well-remembered dreams that usually involve efforts to avoid threats to survival, security, or physical integrity and that generally occur during the second half of the major sleep episode. B. On awakening from the dysphoric dreams, the individual rapidly becomes oriented and alert. C. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. D. The nightmare symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication). E. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not adequately explain the predominant complaint of dysphoric dreams. Specify if: During sleep onset Specify if: With mental disorder, including substance use disorders With medical condition With another sleep disorder Coding note: The code F51.5 applies to all three specifiers. Code also the relevant associated mental disorder, medical condition, or other sleep disorder immediately after the code for nightmare disorder in order to indicate the association. Specify if: Acute: Duration of period of nightmares is 1 month or less. Subacute: Duration of period of nightmares is greater than 1 month but less than 6 months. Persistent: Duration of period of nightmares is 6 months or greater. Specify current severity: Severity can be rated by the frequency with which the nightmares occur: Mild: Less than one episode per week on average. Moderate: One or more episodes per week but less than nightly. Severe: Episodes nightly. 458 Recording Procedures The specifiers “with mental disorder, including substance use disorders”; “with medical condition”; and “with another sleep disorder” are available to allow the clinician to note clinically relevant comorbidities. In such cases, record F51.5 nightmare disorder with [name of comorbid condition(s) or disorder(s)] followed by the diagnostic code(s) for the comorbid conditions or disorders (e.g., F51.5 nightmare disorder with moderate alcohol use disorder and rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder; F10.20 moderate alcohol use disorder; G47.52 REM sleep behavior disorder). Diagnostic Features Nightmares are typically lengthy, elaborate, story-like sequences of dream imagery that seem real and that incite anxiety, fear, or other dysphoric emotions. Nightmare content typically focuses on attempts to avoid or cope with imminent danger but may involve themes that evoke other negative emotions. Nightmares occurring after traumatic experiences may replicate the threatening situation (“replicative nightmares”), but most do not. On awakening, nightmares are well remembered and can be described in detail. They arise almost exclusively during REM sleep and can thus occur throughout sleep but are more likely in the second half of the major sleep episode when dreaming is longer and more intense. Factors that increase early-night REM intensity, such as sleep fragmentation or deprivation, jet lag, and medications that affect REM sleep, might facilitate nightmares earlier in the night, including at sleep onset. Nightmares usually terminate with awakening and rapid return of full alertness. However, the dysphoric emotions may persist into wakefulness and contribute to difficulty returning to sleep and lasting daytime distress. Some nightmares, known as “bad dreams,” may not induce awakening and are recalled only later. If nightmares occur during sleep-onset REM periods (hypnagogic), the dysphoric emotion is frequently accompanied by an awakening and being unable to move voluntarily (sleep paralysis), which may also occur in isolation without a preceding dream or nightmare. Associated Features Mild autonomic arousal, including sweating, tachycardia, and tachypnea, may characterize nightmares. Body movements and vocalizations are not characteristic because of REM sleep– related loss of skeletal muscle tone. When talking or emoting occurs in nightmare disorder, the vocal or motor behaviors are typically brief events terminating the nightmare. Distinct from such motor or vocal activity, true dream enactment behavior may occur when there is a loss of normal REM atonia (REM sleep behavior disorder). Prevalence Prevalence of nightmares during childhood is approximately 1%–5%. From 1.3% to 3.9% of parents report that their preschool children have nightmares “often” or “always.” Prevalence increases to 5.2% in children ages 5–15 years. Family history of nightmares, parasomnia symptoms, and daytime consequences of temper outbursts/mood disturbance and poor academic performance are associated with frequent nightmares during childhood and adolescence, with comorbid insomnia seen in approximately 20% of children with frequent nightmares. Among adults, prevalence of nightmares at least monthly is 6%. Among adults in several countries, prevalence of weekly nightmares is 2%–6%, whereas prevalence of frequent nightmares is 1%– 5%. Estimates often combine idiopathic and posttraumatic nightmares indiscriminately. Environmental. Genetic and physiological. Course modifiers. Development and Course Nightmares often begin between ages 3 and 6 years but reach a peak prevalence and severity in late adolescence or early adulthood. Nightmares most likely appear in children 459 exposed to acute or chronic psychosocial stressors and thus may not resolve spontaneously. In a minority, frequent nightmares persist into adulthood, becoming virtually a lifelong disturbance. Although specific nightmare content may reflect the individual’s age, the essential features of the disorder are the same across age groups. Risk and Prognostic Factors Frequent nightmares in middle-age adults in the general community population have been shown in two studies in Hong Kong and Finland to be associated with low income, mood disturbance, insomnia or sleep-disordered breathing, and use of antidepressants or frequent heavy alcohol use. Sleep deprivation or fragmentation, and irregular sleep-wake schedules that alter the timing, intensity, or quantity of REM sleep can put individuals at risk for nightmares. Individuals who experience nightmares report more frequent past adverse events, but not necessarily trauma. Twin studies have identified genetic effects on the disposition to nightmares and their co-occurrence with other nocturnal behaviors (e.g., sleeptalking). Adaptive parental bedside behaviors, such as soothing the child following nightmares, may protect against developing chronic nightmares. Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues The significance attributed to nightmares may vary by culture, and sensitivity to such beliefs may facilitate disclosure. In several cultural contexts, nightmares may be viewed as important indicators of the individual’s spiritual status or the condition of those who have died (e.g., among Indonesian civil war survivors, American Indian veterans, and Cambodian refugees). Frequent nightmares among Cambodian refugees are strongly associated with the presence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD); assessment of the temporal sequence and severity of nightmares relative to other symptoms is needed to determine whether a separate diagnosis of nightmare disorder is warranted. Among Hmong immigrants to the United States, frequent nightmares are more common than among non-Latinx Whites in the same region and are associated with traumatic experiences and other sleep disorders, such as sleep paralysis and restless sleep. Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues Adult women report having nightmares more frequently than adult men, but this gender difference was not found in children and the elderly. Nightmare content differs by gender, with women tending to report themes of sexual harassment or of loved ones disappearing/dying, and men tending to report themes of physical aggression or war/terror. Sleep terror disorder. REM sleep behavior disorder. Bereavement. Diagnostic Markers Polysomnographic studies demonstrate abrupt awakenings from REM sleep, usually during the second half of the night, prior to report of a nightmare. Heart, respiratory, and eye movement rates may quicken or increase in variability before awakening. Nightmares following traumatic events may also arise during light non-REM (NREM) sleep, particularly stage 2 sleep (now called N2 sleep). The typical sleep of individuals with nightmares is mildly impaired (e.g., reduced efficiency, less slow-wave sleep, more awakenings), with more frequent periodic leg movements in sleep and relative sympathetic nervous system activation after REM sleep deprivation. Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior Individuals with frequent nightmares are at substantially greater risk for suicidal thoughts or behavior, even when gender and mental illness are taken into account. 460 Functional Consequences of Nightmare Disorder Nightmares cause more significant subjective distress than demonstrable social or occupational impairment. However, if awakenings are frequent or result in sleep avoidance, individuals may experience excessive daytime sleepiness, poor concentration, depression, anxiety, or irritability. Frequent childhood nightmares (e.g., several per week) may cause significant distress to parents and children. Differential Diagnosis Both nightmare disorder and sleep terror disorder include awakenings or partial awakenings with fearfulness and autonomic activation, but the two disorders can be readily differentiated. Nightmares typically occur later in the night, during REM sleep, and produce vivid, story-like, and clearly recalled dreams; mild autonomic arousal; and complete awakenings. Sleep terrors typically arise in the first third of the night during deep NREM sleep (especially during stage 3 sleep, now called N3 sleep) and produce either no dream recall or images without an elaborate story-like quality. Sleep terrors are thought to be caused by partial awakenings intermixed with persisting sleep, with clinical manifestations of confusion, disorientation, and only partial responsiveness, and often with substantial autonomic arousal. There is usually amnesia for the event in the morning. The presence of complex vocal and motor activity during frightening dreams should prompt further evaluation for REM sleep behavior disorder, which occurs more typically among late middle- and older-age men but may also affect women. Although nightmares are typically characteristic of REM sleep behavior disorder, unlike nightmare disorder, REM sleep behavior disorder is associated with dream enactment that may cause nocturnal injuries. If the nightmares precede REM sleep behavior disorder and warrant independent clinical attention, an additional diagnosis of nightmare disorder may be given. Dysphoric dreams may occur during bereavement but typically involve loss and sadness and are followed by self-reflection and insight, rather than distress, on awakening. PTSD or acute stress disorder. Narcolepsy. Sleep-related seizures. Breathing-related sleep disorders. Panic disorder. Sleep-related dissociative disorders. Substance or medication use. Nightmares in which the content or affect of the dream is related to a traumatic event may be a component of PTSD or acute stress disorder. An additional diagnosis of nightmare disorder may be warranted if the severity or frequency of the nightmares necessitates independent clinical attention. Nightmares are a frequent complaint in narcolepsy, but the presence of excessive sleepiness, with or without cataplexy, differentiates this condition from nightmare disorder. Nocturnal seizures usually involve stereotyped motor activity. Associated nightmares, if recalled, are often also repetitively stereotyped in nature or reflect epileptogenic features such as the content of diurnal auras, phosphenes (visual sensations in the absence of light input), or ictal imagery. Breathing-related sleep disorders can lead to awakenings with autonomic arousal, but these are not usually accompanied by recall of nightmares. Panic attacks arising during sleep can produce abrupt awakenings with autonomic arousal and fearfulness, but nightmares are typically not reported and symptoms are similar to panic attacks arising during wakefulness. Individuals may recall actual physical or emotional trauma as a “dream” during electroencephalography-documented awakenings. Numerous substances/medications can precipitate nightmares, including dopaminergic drugs; β-adrenergic antagonists and other antihypertensives; amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other stimulants; antidepressants; smoking cessation aids; and melatonin. Withdrawal of REM sleep–suppressant medications 461 (e.g., antidepressants) and alcohol can produce REM sleep rebound accompanied by nightmares. If nightmares are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be considered. Comorbidity Nightmares may be comorbid with several medical conditions, including coronary heart disease, cancer, parkinsonism, and pain, and can accompany medical treatments, such as hemodialysis, or withdrawal from medications or substances of abuse. Nightmares frequently co-occur with other mental disorders, including PTSD, acute stress disorder, insomnia disorder, REM sleep behavior disorder, and psychotic, mood, anxiety, adjustment, and personality disorders, as well as with grief during bereavement. A concurrent nightmare disorder diagnosis should only be considered when independent clinical attention is warranted. These conditions should be listed with the appropriate comorbid category specifier (e.g., “with REM sleep behavior disorder”); see also “Recording Procedures.” Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, presents similar diagnostic criteria for nightmare disorder. G47.52