 Narcolepsy
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. Recurrent periods of an irrepressible need to sleep, lapsing into sleep, or
 napping occurring within the same day. These must have been occurring at least
 three times per week over the past 3 months.
 B. The presence of at least one of the following:
1. Episodes of cataplexy, defined as either (a) or (b), occurring at least a few
 times per month:
 a. In individuals with long-standing disease, brief (seconds to minutes)
 episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone with maintained
 consciousness that are precipitated by laughter or joking.
 b. In children or in individuals within 6 months of onset, spontaneous
 grimaces or jaw-opening episodes with tongue thrusting or a global
 hypotonia, without any obvious emotional triggers.
 2. Hypocretin deficiency, as measured using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
 hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity values (less than or equal to one-third of
 values obtained in healthy subjects tested using the same assay, or less than
 or equal to 110 pg/mL). Low CSF levels of hypocretin-1 must not be observed
 in the context of acute brain injury, inflammation, or infection.
 3. Nocturnal sleep polysomnography showing rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
 latency less than or equal to 15 minutes, or a multiple sleep latency test
 showing a mean sleep latency less than or equal to 8 minutes and two or
 more sleep-onset REM periods.
 Specify whether:
 G47.411 Narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency (type 1):
 Criterion B1 (episodes of cataplexy) or Criterion B2 (low CSF hypocretin-1
 levels) is met.
 G47.419 Narcolepsy without cataplexy and either without hypocretin
 deficiency or hypocretin unmeasured (type 2): Criterion B3 (positive
 polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test) is met, but Criterion B1 is not met
 (i.e., no cataplexy is present) and Criterion B2 is not met (i.e., CSF hypocretin-1
 levels are not low or have not been measured).
 G47.421 Narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency due to a
 medical condition
 G47.429 Narcolepsy without cataplexy and without hypocretin deficiency
 due to a medical condition
 Coding note: For the subtype narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency
 due to a medical condition and the subtype narcolepsy without cataplexy and without
 hypocretin deficiency due to a medical condition, code first the underlying medical
 condition (e.g., G71.11 myotonic dystrophy; G47.429 narcolepsy without cataplexy
 and without hypocretin deficiency due to myotonic dystrophy).
 Specify current severity:
 Mild: Need for naps only once or twice per day. Sleep disturbance, if present, is
 mild. Cataplexy, when present, is infrequent (occurring less than once per week).
 Moderate: Need for multiple naps daily. Sleep may be moderately disturbed.
 Cataplexy, when present, occurs daily or every few days.
 423
Severe: Nearly constant sleepiness and, often, highly disturbed nocturnal sleep
 (which may include excessive body movement and vivid dreams). Cataplexy,
 when present, is drug-resistant, with multiple attacks daily.
 Subtypes
 A diagnosis of narcolepsy, type 1 (NT1; i.e., with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency) is most
 often based on the presence of recurrent sleepiness and cataplexy (given the limited use of
 cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] hypocretin determinations). However, cataplexy can emerge years
 following onset of sleepiness. Therefore, some individuals may be initially assigned a diagnosis
 of narcolepsy, type 2 (NT2; i.e., without cataplexy and either without hypocretin deficiency or
 with hypocretin unmeasured), based on sleepiness and positive multiple sleep latency test
 (MSLT) findings, only to be reassigned to a diagnosis of NT1 following emergence of cataplexy.
 NT1 established by demonstration of low CSF hypocretin levels may manifest without evidence
 of clear cataplexy. Other explanations for excessive daytime sleepiness (e.g., sleep deprivation,
 shift work, other sleep disorders) and episodes of sudden loss of muscle tone (e.g., seizures, falls
 of other origin, functional neurological symptom disorder [conversion disorder]) should be ruled
 out. NT2 is established on the basis of chronic sleepiness and characteristic nocturnal sleep
 polysomnography findings (e.g., short REM sleep latency) or MSLT findings showing short
 mean sleep latency and two or more sleep-onset REM periods (SOREMPs).
 NT1 and NT2 can result from other neurological, infectious, metabolic, and genetic
 conditions. Inherited disorders, tumors, and head trauma are the most common causes of
 secondary narcolepsy. In other cases, the destruction of hypocretin neurons may be secondary to
 trauma or hypothalamic surgery. Head trauma or infections of the central nervous system can,
 however, produce transitory decreases in CSF hypocretin-1 levels without hypocretin cell loss,
 complicating the diagnosis.
 Other etiologies include inflammatory lesions due to multiple sclerosis and acute
 disseminated encephalomyelitis, vascular disorders such as stroke, and encephalitis. Autosomal
 dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness, and narcolepsy, or ADCA DN, is a familial degenerative
 disorder due to missense mutations of the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1) gene. Cataplexy
 with some degree of sleepiness can be caused by other neurological conditions, including Prader
Willi syndrome, Niemann-Pick disease type C, Möbius syndrome, and Norrie disease.
 Hypocretin deficiency has been reported in Parkinson’s disease as well. NT2-like physiology has
 been reported in myotonic dystrophy and Prader-Willi syndrome.
 Diagnostic Features
 The essential features of narcolepsy are recurrent daytime naps or lapses into sleep that occur
 typically daily but that must occur at a minimum of three times a week for at least 3 months
 (Criterion A), and are accompanied by one or more of the following: cataplexy (Criterion B1),
 hypocretin deficiency (Criterion B2), or characteristic abnormalities on a nocturnal
 polysomnogram or on the MSLT (Criterion B3). In most individuals with NT1, the first
 symptom to manifest is sleepiness or increased sleep need, followed by cataplexy. Sleepiness is
 worse in sedentary circumstances and typically is relieved by brief (10–20 minutes) naps.
 NT1 generally manifests with cataplexy, typically brief episodes (seconds up to 2 minutes) of
sudden, bilateral loss of muscle tone precipitated by emotions. A range of positive emotions can
 trigger cataplexy, including those associated with laughter, anticipation, or surprise. Less
 commonly, cataplexy can be triggered by negative emotions such as anger and embarrassment.
 Muscles affected include those of the neck, jaw, arms, legs, or whole body, resulting in head
 bobbing, jaw dropping, or complete falls. Individuals are awake and aware during cataplexy.
 Cataplexy should not be confused with “weakness” occurring in
 424
 the context of athletic activities (physiological) or exclusively after unusual emotional
 triggers such as stress or anxiety (suggesting possible psychopathology).
 In children and rarely in adults with acute NT1 symptom onset, cataplexy may manifest as
 continuous hypotonia rather than episodic bouts of weakness triggered by strong emotions. This
 continuous hypotonia may result in gait instability, ptosis, and slack jaw. Superimposed on this
 muscle weakness, some individuals may demonstrate phenomena such as tongue protrusion and
 grimacing. This static cataplexy is most common within 6 months of a rapid onset.
 NT1 is caused by loss of hypothalamic neurons that produce the hypocretin (orexin)
 neuropeptides, and CSF hypocretin levels are typically less than one-third of control values (< 
110 pg/mL in most laboratories). Individuals with cataplexy have been shown to have low CSF
 hypocretin levels in 85%–90% of cases. In contrast, most individuals with NT2 have normal or
 intermediate levels of CSF hypocretin. Thus, hypocretin deficiency is a sufficient diagnostic test
 for NT1 (Criterion B2). If CSF hypocretin is measured and not low, an NT2 diagnosis is based
 on clinical symptoms (Criterion A) and sleep study data outlined in Criterion B3.
 A nocturnal polysomnogram followed by an MSLT is the conventional method for
 confirming the diagnosis of both NT1 (if hypocretin testing is unavailable or not feasible) and
 NT2 (Criterion B3). These tests must be performed after the individual has stopped all
 psychotropic medications (for a duration based on elimination half-life) and obtained adequate
 sleep time on a normal sleep-wake schedule (as documented with sleep diaries or, preferably,
 actigraphy), ideally for 2 weeks. Notably, the abrupt discontinuation of antidepressants, α
adrenergic agonist medications, or stimulants or use of these medications during testing can alter
 REM sleep physiology.
 The MSLT result must be positive for a diagnosis of NT2, showing a mean sleep latency of
 ≤ 8 minutes plus at least two SOREMPs; specifically, REM sleep must occur in at least two of
 the five nap opportunities. Alternatively, a nocturnal sleep-onset REM period (nSOREMP; REM
 sleep-onset latency ≤ 15 minutes) during polysomnography is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis
 and meets Criterion B3. An nSOREMP is highly specific to NT1 (95%–97%) but only
 moderately sensitive (54%–57%). False positive findings of SOREMPs can occur with shift
 work, circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, severe obstructive sleep apnea, medication effects,
 and insufficient sleep disorder.
 The nocturnal polysomnogram and MSLT are diagnostically limited, especially in NT2.
 While reliability of diagnostic MSLT testing is relatively high at 85%–95% for NT1, reliability
 for the NT2 diagnosis is poorer. Test-retest reliability may be < 50%. This poor reliability may
 be due to day-to-day variability in NT2 physiology and technical aspects of the polysomnogram
 and MSLT testing, especially inadequate attention to prior sleep time/schedule and
 medication/drug use.
Normal or intermediate CSF hypocretin levels among individuals with cataplexy symptoms
 can decline to undetectable levels over time.
 Associated Features
 When sleepiness is severe, automatic behaviors may occur, with the individual continuing his or
 her activities in a semiautomatic, hazelike fashion without memory or consciousness.
 Approximately 20%–60% of individuals experience vivid hypnagogic hallucinations before or
 upon falling asleep or hypnopompic hallucinations just after awakening. These hallucinations are
 typically visual or auditory, and sometimes tactile. They are distinct from the less vivid,
 nonhallucinatory dream-like mentation at sleep onset that occurs in persons with normal sleep.
 Approximately 20%–60% of affected individuals experience sleep paralysis upon falling
 asleep or awakening, leaving them awake but unable to move or speak. However, many normal
 sleepers also report occasional sleep paralysis, especially with stress or sleep
 425
 deprivation. Individuals with narcolepsy can have a range of nocturnal sleep symptoms,
 including disrupted nighttime sleep (frequent, brief awakenings), vivid and realistic dreams,
 periodic limb movements of sleep, and REM sleep behavior disorder. Nocturnal eating may
 occur. Obesity is common. Individuals may appear sleepy or fall asleep in the waiting area or
 during clinical examination. During cataplexy, individuals may slump in a chair and have slurred
 speech or drooping eyelids. If the clinician is able to check reflexes during cataplexy (most
 attacks are < 10 seconds), reflexes are abolished during whole body cataplexy—an important
 finding distinguishing genuine cataplexy from functional neurological symptom disorder
 (conversion disorder).
 Although IQ testing is generally normal in individuals with narcolepsy, impairments in
 working memory and executive functioning have been reported.
 Prevalence
 Narcolepsy-cataplexy (NT1) affects 0.02%–0.05% of the adult general population worldwide
 and has an incidence of 0.74 per 100,000 person-years in the United States. Some prevalence
 variation has been reported, including lower rates in Israel and higher rates in Japan than in
 Europe and the United States. The true prevalence of NT2 is unknown in part because of
 diagnostic variability. Narcolepsy affects both genders fairly equally, but this may vary among
 different populations.
 Development and Course
 Onset occurs most often in childhood and adolescence or young adulthood but rarely in old age.
 Peak age at onset is around 15–25 years. Onset can be abrupt or progressive, with cataplexy
 developing over years. It has been reported that children presenting with abrupt onset of NT1
 symptoms have the highest disease severity but that disease severity in these cases tends to
 partially improve in the first few years after onset. Abrupt onset in young, prepubescent children
 can be associated with obesity and premature puberty. About 50% of individuals with narcolepsy
 diagnosed in adulthood recall symptom onset in childhood or adolescence, highlighting problems
of diagnostic delays for this condition. Once the disorder has manifested, the course is persistent
 and lifelong.
 In 90% of cases, the first symptom to manifest is sleepiness or increased sleep, followed by
 cataplexy (within 1 year in 50% of cases, within 3 years in 85%). Sleepiness, hypnagogic
 hallucinations, vivid dreaming, and REM sleep behavior disorder (vocalizations or complex
 motor behavior during REM sleep) are early symptoms. Excessive sleep rapidly progresses to an
 inability to stay awake during the day, and to maintain good sleep at night, without a clear
 increase in total 24-hour sleep time. In the first months, cataplexy may be atypical, especially in
 children, manifesting with a generalized hypotonia rather than with episodic emotionally
 triggered weakness. In general, narcolepsy symptoms remain fairly stable but may fluctuate with
 life events such as pregnancy and stressors. Exacerbations of symptoms suggest lack of
 compliance with medications or development of a concurrent sleep disorder, notably sleep apnea,
 which has been identified in about a quarter of individuals with narcolepsy.
 Young children and adolescents with narcolepsy often develop aggression or behavioral
 problems secondary to sleepiness and/or nighttime sleep disruption. Workload and social
 pressure increase through high school and college, reducing available sleep time at night.
 Pregnancy does not seem to modify symptoms consistently. After retirement, individuals
 typically have more opportunity for napping, reducing the need for stimulants. Maintaining a
 regular schedule benefits individuals at all ages.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Temperamental.
 Individuals with narcolepsy commonly report that they need more sleep than
 other family members.
 426
 Environmental.
 Group A streptococcal throat infection, influenza (notably pandemic H1N1
 2009), or other winter infections, as well as vaccinations (specifically Pandemrix H1N1
 vaccination), may trigger an autoimmune process in some individuals, producing narcolepsy a
 few months later. Head trauma and abrupt changes in sleep-wake patterns (e.g., job changes,
 stress) may be additional triggers.
 Genetic and physiological.
 Monozygotic twins are 25%–32% concordant for narcolepsy. The
 prevalence of narcolepsy is 1%–2% in first-degree relatives (a 10- to 40-fold increase overall).
 Narcolepsy is strongly associated with HLA DQB1*06:02 (see “Diagnostic Markers”).
 DQB1*03:01 increases, while DQB1*05:01, DQB1*06:01, and DQB1*06:03 reduce risk in the
 presence of DQB1*06:02, but the effect is small. Polymorphisms within the T-cell receptor alpha
 gene and other immune-modulating genes also modulate risk slightly.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Narcolepsy has been described in many ethnoracial groups and cultural contexts. One study of
 1,097 treatment-seeking individuals suggested that among African Americans, more cases may
 manifest without cataplexy or with atypical cataplexy (although CSF hypocretin is low), and
 with earlier onset compared with non-Latinx Whites. Diagnosis may be further complicated by
 the higher presence of obesity and obstructive sleep apnea in this population, which can be
related to differential exposure to social determinants of health, including food insecurity, food
 deserts, and limited access to safe and affordable places for physical activity. Individuals with
 narcolepsy often experience sleep paralysis, which may be attributed to supernatural forces (e.g.,
 frightening spirit is sitting on the sleeper’s chest) in some cultural contexts, contributing to the
 perceived dangerousness of the condition and to help-seeking decisions.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Nocturnal polysomnography followed by an MSLT is used to confirm the diagnosis of
 narcolepsy, especially when the disorder is first being diagnosed and before treatment has begun.
 In the presence of clear-cut cataplexy, the polysomnography and MSLT are confirmatory for
 NT1. In the absence of cataplexy and hypocretin deficiency (if measured), the MSLT is
 diagnostic of NT2. Drug or medication effects (e.g., REM-inhibiting antidepressants or sedating
 medications), stimulant withdrawal, prior sleep deprivation, shift work, or severe depression may
 result in an inaccurate MSLT result and must be ruled out prior to performance of the MSLT. In
 particular, chronically insufficient sleep is common and must be considered.
 An nSOREMP is highly specific (approximately 1% positive in control subjects) but
 moderately sensitive (approximately 50%) for NT1. In contrast, an nSOREMP was only found in
 10%–23% of NT2 persons with normal hypocretin levels, suggesting even lower sensitivity in
 this subtype. The MSLT result is considered positive for narcolepsy if it displays an average
 sleep latency of ≤ 8 minutes and SOREMPs in two or more naps on a four- or five-nap test. The
 MSLT result is positive in 90%–95% of individuals with NT1 versus 2%–4% of control subjects
 or individuals with other sleep disorders. As noted, poor test-retest reliability for NT2 precludes
 determination of comparable data for NT2. Additional polysomnographic findings among
 individuals with narcolepsy often include frequent arousals, decreased sleep efficiency, and
 increased stage 1 sleep. Periodic limb movements (found in about 40% of individuals with NT1)
 and sleep apnea are often noted.
 Hypocretin deficiency is demonstrated by measuring CSF hypocretin-1 levels. The test is
 particularly useful in individuals with suspected pseudocataplexy and those without typical
 cataplexy, or in treatment-refractory cases. The diagnostic value of the test is not affected by
 medications, sleep deprivation, or the time of day or night when it is collected, but the findings
 are uninterpretable when the individual is severely ill with a concurrent
 427
 infection or head trauma or is comatose. CSF cytology, protein, and glucose are within
 normal range even when sampled within weeks of rapid onset of the disorder. When measured in
 individuals with typical cataplexy symptoms, CSF hypocretin-1 is often already very diminished
 or undetectable.
 About 85%–95% of individuals with NT1 are positive for the HLA DQB1*06:02 haplotype.
 This gene influences immune system antigen presentation, supporting an underlying autoimmune
 pathophysiology of NT1. Outbreaks of NT1 after specific vaccinations and infections further
 support an autoimmune etiology. In contrast to NT1, there are no biomarkers of NT2. Only about
 40%–50% of individuals with NT2 are positive for DQB1*06:02. As 12%–38% of the general
 population is DQB1*06:02 positive, testing for this allele is not very helpful for diagnosing NT2
but can be helpful for screening of NT1.
 Functional Consequences of Narcolepsy
 School performance, driving, work, or other activities that require sustained attention are
 impaired, and individuals with narcolepsy should avoid jobs that place themselves (e.g., working
 with machinery) or others (e.g., bus driver, pilot) in danger. Once the narcolepsy is controlled
 with therapy, individuals can usually drive, although rarely long distances alone. Untreated
 individuals are also at risk for social isolation and accidental injury to themselves or others.
 Social relations may suffer as these individuals strive to avert cataplexy by exerting control over
 emotions or stimuli that cause emotions.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Other hypersomnias.
 Hypersomnolence disorder (also known as idiopathic hypersomnia) and
 narcolepsy are similar with respect to the presence of chronic daytime sleepiness, age at onset
 (typically adolescence or early adulthood), and stable course over time, but can be distinguished
 based on distinctive clinical and laboratory features. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder
 typically have longer and less disrupted nocturnal sleep, greater difficulty awakening, more
 persistent daytime sleepiness (as opposed to more discrete “sleep attacks” in narcolepsy), longer
 and less refreshing daytime sleep episodes, and little or no dreaming during daytime naps. By
 contrast, individuals with NT1 generally have cataplexy. Those with NT1 or NT2 may
 demonstrate recurrent intrusions of elements of REM sleep into the transition between sleep and
 wakefulness (e.g., sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis). The MSLT typically
 demonstrates shorter sleep latencies (i.e., greater physiological sleepiness) as well as the
 presence of multiple SOREMPs in individuals with narcolepsy.
 Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep.
 Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep
 are common in adolescents and shift workers. In adolescents, difficulties falling asleep at night
 are common, causing sleep deprivation. The MSLT result may be falsely positive if conducted
 while the individual is sleep deprived or while his or her sleep is phase delayed.
 Sleep apnea syndromes.
 Obstructive sleep apnea is common in the general population and can be
 present in individuals with narcolepsy due to obesity. Because obstructive sleep apnea is more
 frequent than narcolepsy, cataplexy may be overlooked (or absent). Narcolepsy should be
 considered in individuals with persistent sleepiness despite treatment of their sleep apnea.
 Insomnia disorder.
 Individuals with narcolepsy may focus on the presence of nocturnal sleep
 disruption and incorrectly attribute daytime sleepiness to insomnia disorder. Although
 individuals with narcolepsy, like those with insomnia disorder, may experience frequent
 awakenings during the night, individuals with narcolepsy typically have no difficulty initiating
 sleep or returning to sleep in contrast to those with insomnia disorder.
 428
 Moreover, insomnia disorder is not typically associated with the severity of daytime sleepiness
 observed in narcolepsy.
 Major depressive disorder.
 Excessive daytime sleepiness is a common complaint of both
individuals with major depression and individuals with narcolepsy. The presence of cataplexy
 (which is not a feature of major depressive disorder) along with the severity of excessive daytime
 sleepiness indicates a diagnosis of NT1 rather than major depressive disorder. Moreover, in
 individuals with major depression, MSLT results are most often normal, and there is dissociation
 between subjective and objective sleepiness, as measured by the mean sleep latency during the
 MSLT. In a meta-analysis of individuals with psychiatric disorders evaluated for sleepiness,
 while 25% had a mean sleep latency of < 8 minutes on the MSLT, only rarely were two or more
 SOREMPs noted on the MSLT, highlighting the more specific REM sleep dysfunction of
 narcolepsy.
 Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder; pseudocataplexy).
 Individuals 
with
 functional neurological symptom disorder can present with weakness that may raise questions of
 cataplexy. However, in functional neurological symptom disorder, the weakness is often long
lasting, has unusual triggers, and can result in frequent falls. Individuals may report sleeping and
 dreaming during MSLT naps, yet the MSLT does not show the characteristic SOREMP. Home
 video recordings and video during sleep studies can be helpful to distinguish this condition from
 true cataplexy. The weakness is usually generalized in pseudocataplexy, without partial attacks.
 Full-blown, long-lasting pseudocataplexy may occur during consultation, allowing the
 examining physician enough time to verify reflexes, which remain intact.
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or other behavioral problems.
 In children and adolescents,
 sleepiness can cause behavioral problems, including aggressiveness and inattention, leading to a
 misdiagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
 Atonic seizures.
 Atonic seizures, a type of seizure that causes sudden loss of muscle strength,
 must be distinguished from cataplexy. Atonic seizures are not commonly triggered by emotions
 and tend to manifest as abrupt falls rather than the slower “melting” quality of cataplexy. Atonic
 seizures usually occur in individuals with additional seizure types and have distinct signatures on
 the electroencephalogram.
 Syncope.
 Chorea and motor disorders.
 Like syncope, cataplexy usually develops over several seconds, but individuals with
 cataplexy do not have presyncopal symptoms of dizziness, tunnel vision, and auditory changes.
 In young children, cataplexy can be misdiagnosed as chorea or
 pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections
 (PANDAS), especially in the context of a strep throat infection and high antistreptolysin O
 antibody levels. Some children may have an overlapping motor disorder close to onset of the
 cataplexy.
 Schizophrenia.
 In the presence of florid and vivid hypnagogic hallucinations, individuals with
 narcolepsy may think these experiences are real—a feature that suggests the presence of a true
 hallucination characteristic of schizophrenia. However, clear differences have been described in
 the pattern of hallucinatory experiences in narcolepsy compared with schizophrenia. Individuals
 with narcolepsy tend to report sleep-related multisensory “holistic” hallucinations (visual,
 auditory, tactile) rather than the predominantly verbal-auditory sensory mode of individuals with
 schizophrenia. Moreover, high-dose stimulant treatment of individuals with narcolepsy may
 result in the development of persecutory delusions. If cataplexy is present with hallucinations or
 delusions, the first clinical supposition would be that these symptoms are secondary to
 narcolepsy before consideration of a co-occurring diagnosis of schizophrenia.
429
 Comorbidity
 Medical and psychiatric comorbidities are common among individuals with narcolepsy and
 include obesity, bruxism, enuresis, precocious puberty (among individuals with pediatric-onset
 narcolepsy), mood disorders, and ADHD. Rapid weight gain is common in young children with a
 sudden disease onset. Parasomnias (e.g., sleepwalking, REM sleep behavior disorder),
 obstructive sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome, and periodic limb movements are common in
 individuals who develop narcolepsy. Comorbid sleep apnea should be considered if there is a
 sudden aggravation of preexisting narcolepsy.
 Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
 The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), differentiates two
 subtypes of narcolepsy: NT1 (narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency) and NT2
 (narcolepsy without cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency). NT1 secondary to another medical
 condition (G47.421) and NT2 secondary to another medical condition (G47.429) are reported in
 ICSD-3 as secondary narcolepsy subtypes