Restless Legs Syndrome
 Diagnostic Criteria
 A. An urge to move the legs, usually accompanied by or in response to
 uncomfortable and unpleasant sensations in the legs, characterized by all of the
 following:
 1. The urge to move the legs begins or worsens during periods of rest or
 inactivity.
 2. The urge to move the legs is partially or totally relieved by movement.
 465
 3. The urge to move the legs is worse in the evening or at night than during the
 day, or occurs only in the evening or at night.
 B. The symptoms in Criterion A occur at least three times per week and have
 persisted for at least 3 months.
 C. The symptoms in Criterion A are accompanied by significant distress or
 impairment in social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or other
 important areas of functioning.
 D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not attributable to another mental disorder or
 medical condition (e.g., arthritis, leg edema, peripheral ischemia, leg cramps)
 and are not better explained by a behavioral condition (e.g., positional
 discomfort, habitual foot tapping).
 E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a drug of abuse
 or medication (e.g., akathisia).
 Diagnostic Features
 Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a sensorimotor, neurological sleep disorder characterized by a
 desire to move the legs or arms, usually associated with uncomfortable sensations typically
 described as creeping, crawling, tingling, burning, or itching (Criterion A). Frequent movements
of the legs occur in an effort to relieve the uncomfortable sensations. Although symptoms can
 occur during the daytime, they commonly occur in the late afternoon or evening hours, and in
 some individuals, symptoms occur only in the evening or night. Symptoms are often most severe
 at night when the individual is at rest, such as sitting or lying in bed. Evening worsening occurs
 independently of any differences in activity. The diagnosis of RLS is based primarily on
 individual self-report and history. It is important to differentiate RLS from other conditions that
 cause leg discomfort, such as positional discomfort and leg cramps (Criterion D).
 The symptoms of RLS can delay sleep onset and awaken the individual from sleep and are
 associated with significant sleep fragmentation. The relief obtained from moving the legs may no
 longer be apparent in severe cases. RLS is associated with daytime sleepiness and is frequently
 accompanied by significant clinical distress or functional impairment.
 Associated Features
 Periodic leg movements in sleep (PLMS) can serve as corroborating evidence for RLS, with up
 to 90% of individuals diagnosed with RLS demonstrating PLMS when recordings are taken over
 multiple nights. Periodic leg movements during wakefulness are also supportive of an RLS
 diagnosis. Reports of difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep and of excessive daytime
 sleepiness substantiate a diagnosis of RLS. Additional supportive features include a family
 history of RLS among first-degree relatives and a reduction in symptoms, at least initially, with
 dopaminergic treatment.
 Prevalence
 Prevalence rates of RLS vary widely when broad criteria are utilized. When frequency of
 symptoms is at least three times per week with moderate or severe distress, the prevalence rate in
 the United States and Europe has been estimated as 1.6%. RLS that is severe enough to
 significantly impair functioning or is associated with mental disorders, including depression and
 anxiety, occurs in approximately 2%–3% of the population, as assessed in Western Europe, the
 United States, and South Korea. RLS is about twice as common in women as men and increases
 in prevalence with age. Reports of RLS vary across geographic regions, with lower prevalence in
 several Asian populations (e.g., Japan, South Korea).
 466
 Development and Course
 The onset of RLS typically occurs in the second or third decade. Approximately 40% of
 individuals diagnosed with RLS during adulthood report having experienced symptoms before
 age 20 years, and 20% report having experienced symptoms before age 10 years. Prevalence
 rates of RLS increase steadily with age until about age 60 years, with symptoms remaining stable
 or decreasing slightly in older age groups. Compared with nonfamilial cases, familial RLS
 usually has a younger age at onset and a slower progressive course. The clinical course of RLS
 differs by age at onset. When onset occurs before age 45, there is often a slow progression of
 symptoms. In late-onset RLS, rapid progression is typical, and aggravating factors are common.
 The RLS phenotype appears similar across the life span.
 Diagnosis of RLS in children can be difficult because of the centrality of self-report in
establishing the diagnosis. While Criterion A for adults assumes that the description of “urge to
 move” is by the individual, pediatric diagnosis also requires a description in the child’s own
 words rather than by a parent or caretaker. Typically children age 6 years or older are able to
 provide detailed, adequate descriptors of RLS. However, children rarely use or understand the
 word “urge,” reporting instead that their legs “have to” or “got to” move. Also, potentially
 related to prolonged periods of sitting during class, two-thirds of children and adolescents with
 RLS report daytime leg sensations. Thus, for diagnostic Criterion A3, it is important to compare
 equal duration of sitting or lying down in the day to sitting or lying down in the evening or night.
 Nocturnal worsening tends to persist even in pediatric RLS. As with RLS in adults, there is a
 significant negative impact on sleep, mood, cognition, and function. Impairment in children and
 adolescents is manifested more often in behavioral and educational domains.
 Risk and Prognostic Factors
 Genetic and physiological.
 Predisposing factors include female sex, advancing age, genetic risk
 variants, and family history of RLS. Precipitating factors such as iron deficiency are often time
limited, with most individuals resuming normal sleep patterns after the triggering event has
 disappeared. Genetic risk variants also play a role in RLS secondary to disorders such as uremia,
 suggesting that individuals with a genetic susceptibility develop RLS in the presence of
 additional risk factors.
 Genome-wide association studies have found that RLS is significantly associated with
 multiple genetic variants in intronic or intergenic regions. The variant in MEIS1 has the strongest
 association with RLS of these genes, with nearly double the risk of RLS in the 7% of the
 population with this polymorphism among European-ancestry samples studied.
 Pathophysiological mechanisms in RLS also include disturbances in the central dopaminergic
 and opioidergic systems and disturbances in iron metabolism. Treatment efficacy of
 dopaminergic drugs, opioids, and iron provides further support that these systems play a role in
 the pathophysiology of RLS. RLS may predispose to depression, and the effective treatment of
 RLS may significantly reduce depressive symptoms. However, serotonergic antidepressants can
 induce or aggravate RLS in some individuals.
 Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Among indigenous-descent Latin American adult populations in the United States, including
 Mexican Americans with low acculturation to U.S. society, the reported prevalence of RLS
 appears to be lower when compared with Mexican Americans with higher acculturation. Among
 participants who reported RLS in a large population-based survey, risk factors associated with
 RLS were different in Mexican Americans (higher among women and persons who smoke)
 compared with non-Latinx Whites (older age, defined as ≥ 48 years).
 Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
 Although RLS is more prevalent in women than in men, there are no diagnostic differences
 according to gender. The prevalence of RLS during pregnancy is two to three times greater
 467
than in the general population. RLS associated with pregnancy peaks during the third trimester
 and improves or resolves in most cases soon after delivery. The sex difference in prevalence of
 RLS is explained at least in part by parity, with nulliparous females being at the same risk for
 RLS as age-matched males.
 Diagnostic Markers
 Polysomnography demonstrates significant abnormalities in RLS, including increased latency to
 sleep and higher arousal index. Periodic limb movements are the motor sign of RLS and are
 usually present on overnight polysomnography, as well as during waking immobilization tests
 and during quiet resting, both of which can provoke RLS symptoms.
 Functional Consequences of Restless Legs Syndrome
 Although the impact of milder symptoms is less well characterized, individuals with RLS
 complain of disruption in at least one activity of daily living, with up to 50% reporting a negative
 impact on mood and a lack of energy. A common consequence of RLS is sleep disturbance,
 including difficulty falling asleep and sleep fragmentation, with associated reduction in total
 sleep time. RLS is also associated with quality-of-life impairments. RLS can result in daytime
 sleepiness or fatigue and is frequently accompanied by significant distress or impairment in
 affective, social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or cognitive functioning.
 Differential Diagnosis
 The most important conditions in the differential diagnosis of RLS are leg cramps, positional
 discomfort, arthralgias/arthritis, myalgias, positional ischemia (numbness), leg edema, peripheral
 neuropathy, radiculopathy, and habitual foot tapping. Muscle cramps, relief with a single
 postural shift, limitation to joints, soreness to palpation (myalgias), and other abnormalities on
 physical examination are not characteristic of RLS. Unlike RLS, nocturnal leg cramps do not
 typically manifest with the desire to move the limbs nor are there frequent limb movements. Less
 common conditions to be differentiated from RLS include neuroleptic-induced akathisia,
 myelopathy, symptomatic venous insufficiency, peripheral artery disease, eczema, other
 orthopedic problems, and anxiety-induced restlessness. Worsening at night and periodic limb
 movements are more common in RLS than in medication-induced akathisia or peripheral
 neuropathy.
 While it is important that RLS symptoms not be solely accounted for by another medical or
 behavioral condition, it should also be appreciated that any of these similar conditions can occur
 in an individual with RLS. This necessitates a separate focus on each possible condition in the
 diagnostic process and when assessing impact. For cases in which the diagnosis of RLS is not
 certain, evaluation for the supportive features of RLS, particularly PLMS or a family history of
 RLS, may be helpful. Clinical features, such as response to a dopaminergic agent and positive
 family history for RLS, can help with the differential diagnosis.
 Comorbidity
 RLS is associated with higher rates of depression, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder,
 and posttraumatic stress disorder. The main medical condition comorbid with RLS is
cardiovascular disease. There may be an association with numerous other medical conditions,
 including hypertension, migraine, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, peripheral neuropathy,
 diabetes mellitus, fibromyalgia, osteoporosis, obesity, thyroid disease, and cancer, as well as
 other sleep disorders including narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea. RLS is common in those
 with iron deficiency, pregnancy, and chronic renal failure and can dramatically improve once
 these conditions resolve.
 468
 Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
 The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, presents similar diagnostic
 criteria for RLS but does not contain a criterion specifying frequency or duration of symptoms.